Tony Tzoggle
...and so we are still flowing along, or 
The Rascally Romance
in a single yet long as hell letter about the flick-short life... 

 Foreword, a sort of

  Apologies & Excuses
With my complete futility at fantasy flights and tall tales yarning, I'm left with no other option but tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth; in other words, just what I have seen, felt, undergone myself.
Because of the admitted limitation, I can't keep pace with dray horses of fantasy, science, mystery, thriller, action, and any other kind of fictions in the field.
And, being a proud miser, I declare that not everything fits under your skin, nor it is possible to pull through anything at all. A sigh.

  Structure & Content
Started with its lengthy title, the novel flows through this, ahem, foreword and the epigraph following it into the extensive narration that might make someone doubt the sincerity of my solemn oath.  
Not every truth is readily accepted by everyone, without starting back and saying, "No way! This couldn't be! Never!"
My immediate and meek advise to those in doubt is to put off reading until they start seeing clearer that the truth may be loaded with no fewer surprises than fiction.
And if such a time will never come, well, I sincerely envy them -  those truly lucky ones!

Being a first-person story, it's not a self-admiring report about me, myself and the number one, but a portrayal of a whole generation in the greatest and most beautiful era since the creation of the world.
Today some creatures would be happy to cut it out by sticking just a couple of labels, criss-cross, "stagnation" and "restructuring", and, tightly packed and sealed, put on a shelf somewhere out of the way.
Yet no labeling nor being smart at storage stacking would conceal the fact that all the world's history had no better period than that where we were so young.

  Style & Language & Age Restrictions
It goes without saying that each and every generation inevitably passes through their youth —  but some of them miss out to erect an epistolary pillar to appropriately mark it.
The style used for the erection at hand can be characterized as that of a rabid realism (that is, where a ball is ruled by the truth not fawning on the written or shadowy laws).

Moving from the style to the language, it should be noted that the pearl-clutching language purists might disapprove the presence of taboo words in The Rascally Romance.
I fully grasp their venerable point and would readily pull along with the sentiment but for the fear to look a liar.
In a true presentation of life, you just cannot hold back these words.
Life, as it is, is somewhat different to a family movie. 
For that reason, I will to expressly discourage persons under 18 years of age reading on any further.

  Technical Notes & Self-Appraisal
Letters are not supposed to be divided into chapters or parts — they just flow on and on to the end.
However,  to leave a reader without a map and compass in the midst of vast hundreds on hundreds of pages in all directions, to deprive her or him of any guiding star or two, calls for a blatant inhuman brutality.
 A feeling of compassion for humanoid brethren and sisteren led me to adding The Table of Contents.
Ain't I a fucking philanthropist thereafter?

  Acknowledgments & Disclaimer
I thank you all, whose names are mentioned in the novel, as well as those who are not in there (they are much more in numbers and it is also their merit that this here work was written after all).
And, most importantly, thank you for having read at least up to this line.
Any book is the product by a collaborative team of two: the reader and the author.
Thank you for your cooperation.

And now we've just reached the point when each one has to decide for themselves whether to go back to the rubbed-along life of their own, with its everyday joys, usual problems, and habitual outlets, which (between us two, as a buddy-teammate to the other) might be the most reasonable course because of who knows what insidious currents could be lurking over there, or keep on rowing ahead, beyond, past the buoy of this here foreword, sort of...
(Oh-oh! Let me take a breath while you're taking a decision...)

So stay assured: whatever the consequences — it's not my fault, and be warned that whichever course you choose, you'll never be the same hereafter. 

