epigraph:
Well, of course,
But, though, still and yet,
And if it’s not quite that
Then – get it!  
And – a-ha!. 
 Vladimir Sherudillo

 ~~~The Birchbark Sketches~~~
 
...Varanda...
...a handful of sounds...
...some sonorant nothing... as any other name.

And the river itself at this distance is nothing but a hum of the discordant lapping of its current that butts in listless foreheads or maybe temples of all the boulders jutting in its way, and spits with foamy jets and splashes hurriedly on and on–for ages–tapping, to no time and out of tune, the smooth blunt pebbles of the riverbed.  

For how long already?
You can safely call it eternity.
 
Peoples arose and, in turn, passed away as the great sage, Abu-Lala, tried to drive it home to his camels, but this river keeps flowing still and must run on as eons ago.

Mountain rivers know no changes, only except for their names.
The Stone Age hunters, sure, had some other name for this Varanda.
All and everything flow, all and everything change, even the names.

Considering the turnover of roamers that it had seen upon its banks it's hard to say who is more fluid: the Varanda's waters or us? 
I'm one of us, neither the first nor the last, on this here bank…

And what is, by the by, this I?
Just another jet, only dehydrated and still for a moment.
Crucified on that same hole, through which the future falls into the past.
A relay pipeline from a snotty noddy kid to a flea-bitten old curmudgeon: and all they have in common is just this word of “I”.
And, sure thing, me too, in between the two of them, on my way from the one to the other, caught in the current moment on the Varanda bank.

O, water! We be of one blood! 

Hey, man! What the matter? Playing a freaking smartie? Who cares a flick about your quotations?

And the most indifferent of all and everything is the time that got frozen around my one-person tent.
The twilight outside the shabby nylon wall still has a long way to creep and crawl to turning into the dark of night.
Then, why not to whittle it away with something useful, eh?
Say, composing a letter promised to your daughter.
You’ve got the promises to keep, remember?
Moreover, there’s no chance to fall asleep so early.
Only, hey dude, don’t lapse too easy into them those crocky quotations.

     Hello, Liliana

(… a much nicer name than "Varanda", right?. 
… shut up and mind your business!..)

At last, I'm starting the letter promised to you at our meeting in Kiev.
What for? To marshal a bunch of self-excuses and belated explanations? 
Anything can be explained, nothing can be redone.
Yet the word was given and I must keep it.

It was real hard to bear your holding me off with an unimpeachable correctness and constant use of the officially plural ‘You’:
‘Sure, Sehrguey Nikolayevich.’
‘No, Sehrguey Nikolayevich.’

I started to loathe my own patronymic, but tried to bear the flogging without a flinch, like a manly man.

It is impossible to call ‘Dad’ a stranger angled from the Internet depths, more so when he looks nothing like the Mr. Pretty Guy sitting in your Mom’s album.
Some obscure mujik with a graying beard...
Nothing like the Daddy of your dreams, who you missed from your early childhood. 
You missed that Daddy, not this old man. No, thanks!

So, our parting hug at the railway station was put up with (not a big deal for a woman nearing thirties) and that's it.
The ice retained its smoothness, not a cobweb-thin crevice had cracked its surface, the gardens hadn't bloomed nor got they filled with cheerful trills of thrushes, blackbirds, and tits merging with triumphant fanfares of the happy end. 

The stranger who had remained a stranger let you go and I promised to write you a letter.
And we parted, two strangers, at the railway station.
But I am luckier of the two because I had much more of you in my life than you had me in yours.

I remember how you kicked me in the nose when turning over in your mother’s belly.
And I can recollect the sterile cocoon in which I carried you from the maternity hospital.
And my heart still gets warm watching you in the circle dance by the Christmas tree in your kindergarten.
The most beautiful kid was you, with your smooth fair hair, in a quilted black vest, red pantyhose, and tiny felt boots. 

I remember quiet Sundays on the empty playgrounds of another, closed, kindergarten in the neighborhood.
We were coming there for you to take a ride on the swing pended with two iron rods.
The swing reached its full sway and they began to screech like weeping gulls over the playgrounds strewn with the fallen leaves.
The sounds ripped my soul apart.
Because I was a weekend Daddy.

Weekdays I was working like a dog, a mule, a slave at the Construction Train 615, aka SMP-615, on various construction sites in the neighbor region to earn an apartment for our young family and have a home, sweet home for us.

And then there came the weekend night when lying on the double bed next to my beloved young wife in the narrow bedroom of your grandparents' 3-room apartment, I was bulldozer-crushed by her story. 

A couple days before the weekend a friend of my wife’s gave her a pleasure ride on his Volga.
He drove miles beyond the city as far as the Hare Pines forest on the Moscow highway. 
There he took a bottle of champagne from the glove compartment and uncorked it under the soft music of the radio in the dashboard.
She sipped a little and sadly said, ‘Take me back, please’.
And he obediently started the motor.

The softly whispered report of my wife on her chaste loyalty was over.
I lay on my back spreadeagled by the avalanche weight of the narrow walls in the bedroom with you sleeping in your wooden cot by one of them.
My heart grew tight and turned a hard stone. 

The only good news was the dark around concealing the cold teardrop which rolled, on its own accord, out the corner of my eye and noiselessly crawled down the temple to get lost among the roots of my hair. 
The last tear of my life.
Later on, its trail was followed by wrinkles digging across my temple but never again any other tear left my eye in any direction.
Except for the tears squeezed out by high winds but those do not count.

(… again at your whining, you namby-pamby?
Toppling pieces of broken hopes smashed and squashed the poor weakling against the anvil of petrified heart?
Seek solace in simple truths.
Simplicity makes them unarguable, insuppressible, unavoidable.

No busting your balls at construction sites, no sunburns or frostbites will remove or postpone the inevitable next time, when she won’t say, ‘Let’s don’t’ and start instead to catch the trick of having it under the circumstances of the car interior.

And here you have another simple undisputed truth – recollecting the past delights brings no joy but remember some grief and the pain suppressed ages ago will lash anew.
It catches you up even here, on the banks of the Varanda river, thousands of kilometers away from the crumpled bedroom, after millions of instances of passing on the ubiquitous relay baton of "I" from one I to the next one… 

And know what, my dear I? Heal yourself with the same dog hair. 
Got bitten by a simple truth? Bust it with as simple a tool.
Crack with the wedge of a wider grammatical approach, move from “I” to “we”.

Who are we?
Some shaven and powdered or greasy and shaggy, depending on the current trend in fashion, troop of trained primates.
A member cannot but live by group's rules and no tricks will get you off the hook.
Ignorance of a law does not exempt from its being applied to you.
Now, comfort yourself with this simple truth, wipe your mawkish snot and wait – maybe it’ll dissolve that nagging squeeze inside your balls.

Whoa! Man! No obscenities in presence of ladies.
Hmm…
Seems like I’d better give it another try…)

Hello, my dear

Though our live meeting did not bring you to call me ‘Dad’ I still can’t but use endearment forms in addressing you.

The day before yesterday in the late afternoon, as outlined by the plan in my last email to you, I climbed up the heights in the neighborhood of the ghost village of Skhtorashen to visit the local celebrity – a two-thousand-year-old sycamore tree, the oldest inhabitant of the Mountainous Karabakh.

The August heat fused the day with the ruts of a desolate dirt road winding up the slope, and my eyes kept casting runaway glances at the steep ahead looking for signs of the water-spring promised by all who had ever visited the place. 

The springs in the Mountainous Karabakh are all arranged in the same manner – a stone wall carved in the slope protects a long trough of roughly hewn stone slabs; it turns at the trough end to keep in its short part a piece of stuck-out iron pipe. 
The stream of cold spring water spouts from the pipe to fill the stone bowl embedded in the wall under the pipe—for thirsty people—and falls over the brim into the knee-deep trough for the cattle and other animals to drink. 
At the far end, the water flows over the trough side to the ground and runs away down the slope. 

The water-spring by the giant tree looked just like any other one.
The only difference was that this spring did not still my thirst which made me visualize it through all the long climb started at the roadside diner by the highway turn to Karmir-Bazaar.
Because of I ran into a mahtagh. 

(… There are two thrilling, by their depth and beauty, expressions in Armenian: "tsahvyd tahnym" and "mahtagh ahnym". 
The first of them literally means, ‘I’ll haul your pain'. 
Just two words but what a depth of thought!
And the second expression gives the pledge of a sacrifice – mahtagh.

The mahtagh-doing marks a happy outcome. 
When, for example, a dear relative was very sick but recovered or, say, survived a car jump into a gorge then it's high time to do a mahtagh. 
Various domestic animals are slain and offered as a mahtagh – depending on the formidability of the avoided threat and prosperity of the mahtagh-doer. 
The meat of the sacrifice must be shared among the relatives and neighbors for them to pronounce the traditional formula, ‘Let the offer be accepted', otherwise that is not a mahtagh. 

Actually, the mahtagh's being edible is no the point.
You may do it even with second-hand garments presenting a poverty-stricken man some worn yet still sturdy jeans.
Giving is the essence of mahtagh – offering before unseen unknown forces that control fate, or chance, or fortune…

It's easy to figure out, that sacrifices to them those murky figures call into question the omnipotence of the Acting Gods in the leading world's religions.
However, those religions made it certain that some habits among the irresponsible part of their congregations are just impossible to eradicate, so they had to turn a blind eye to jumping over the fire built on the shortest summer night, round dances to see the winter off, mahtaghs,  and other like activities.
What can’t be cured must be endured. Damn it!

Frequent use dulls anything and turns any profound expression into just a figure of speech uttered without realizing the beauty of its meaning:
- Tsahvyd tahnym (I’ll haul your pain), how's about paying for the potatoes? Forgot?!
- Mahtagh ahnym (a sacrificial offering on me), a minute before I gave you six one-hundred-drahm coins! Check your pocket.
- Tsahvyd tahnym (I’ll haul your pain), I'm here since morning, there are handfuls of one-hundred-drahm coins in my pockets 
- Mahtagh ahnym (a sacrificial offering on me), I’m not to pay twice for the same potatoes. Don’t wet your whistle too often when a-trading.
etc...)

And, as it was said, the cool drink from the so much longed for water-spring was not my lot that day because in the shade of the long living giant of a tree there was a huge mahtagh-doing in full swing around two rows of tables for a hundred of participants and from the thick of the festivity someone suddenly shouted:  
- Mr. Ogoltsoff! 
And in less than a minute, my arm got into a gentle but irresistible grip from a burly gray-haired mujik who led me up to a young stout woman. 
- You were teaching us! Do you remember me? Could recollect my name?
- Maybe ‘Ahnoosh'?
My random guess ignited general delight and tender joy, that their Ahnoosh is still remembered by name among the teaching staff at the local State University. 
And her Dad, the mahtagh-doer, never loosening his welcome clutch, took me to a vacant place at the far end of the male's table where they immediately replaced a used plate and fork, brought a clean glass and a fresh bottle of tutovka and the toastmaster was already rising with another speech about parents, children, and university diplomas.

The Karabakh tutovka (moonshine from mulberry berries) by its killing force is on a par with ‘ruff' (a fifty-to-fifty mixture of vodka and beer) and ‘northern lights' (medicine alcohol mixed with champagne to the same proportion) but I bravely gulped it down after each toast. 
My dinner companion on the right named Nelson Stepanian (a double namesake of the hero pilot fighter at the Great Patriotic War) swiftly refilled my glass hiding a hooligan grin in his sky-blue squint.

And then I was not up to no sycamores. 
I just picked up my haversack bundled with my tent, and sleeping bag, and walked away across the slope to find a quiet secluded place and there, staggering yet keeping the process under close control, I set the synthetic one-person made in China tent up.
The remnants of my self-control were used on reeling to a nearby oak tree for a leak behind its mighty trunk. 

Turning about and the very first step towards the erected tent pushed me back and smashed against the bumpy oak trunk and I limply drooped along the crevices in its bark down to the tree’s roots and, completely spent, curdled there.
The consciousness twilight thickened sooner than the twilight of the nearing night.
Everything swam before my eyes, a wave of severe sickness rolled to squeeze me and I threw up over a thick bulging root, and then again pressed the back of my neck against the hard edges of the oak rind.
Do fish get seasick?

In the dead of night, its chillness woke me. 
Gaining back the ability of upright walking was not an easy task yet I somehow managed to totter to the tent, adding on the way my worn out groans to the chorus of the whining howls and satanic laughter of jackal packs on the nearby slopes.

That night I for the first time got it in deadly earnest that I could very easily not survive until morning.
Frightened by the ruthless piercing pain in my chest I lay as low as I could and waited for the dawn as for salvation.
It came at last but brought no relief; my pitiful moans were also of no help. 
I just didn't have it in me to stop them – everything was taken away by the tormenting sickness.

Yet, if I had lived through that night (it started to shakily shape in my mind) then this here Cosmos still needed me for some purpose.
My first task was to regain myself. 
Assemble me back. 

The inventory revealed a shortage of the upper denture.
I staggered to the oak, sat on my haunches and dumbly poked with a twig the shallow puddle of stiff vomit between the roots. 
Not there. 
The goodnight hurl had been so forcible that the prosthesis jumped half a meter farther from the puddle, and safely spent the night on the mossy ground: the jackals need nothing of the kind, their teeth are there, and the other gluttonous riff-raff of the woods were not attracted by the piece of plastic for twenty thousand drahms.

All that day I lay up under the tree next to the tent. 
I only was able to creep along with the slow progress of the tree’s shade like an insect in the gnomon shadow on a sundial disk.
‘Don’t drink yourself drunk’ runs a sage saying but, as ages ago I was trying to explain it to someone, my brake system had its own standpoints.

And that same day it became very clear to me that the proximity of the arboreal long-liver leaves no room for a serene repose and dreamful laziness of an untroubled mind.
Distant buzz of mahtagh feasts replacing each other under the sycamore (although not each one was bringing a KAMAZ-truckload of tables for the fest), cows wandering by to the water-spring and back, teenage shepherds eager for communication, occasional horsemen along the nearby trail amazed with the alien hue of the purple synthetic tent – all of that, adding up to the killing hangover, emphasized the need of another spot for my annual hide-out in the wilderness.

And this morning, taking the spring water for the trek ahead, I, at last, observed the tree closely for a report to you.

Indeed, one millennium is not enough to grow as big as that. 
The lower branches are of the size of a-century-old trees.
The bulky trunk, carrying that bunch of a grove, has a split at the base forming a passage.
The stream from the water-spring runs through the cleft inside the trunk (which, possibly, accounts for the sycamore’s longevity) and even a horseman can follow that way if somewhat lower themselves.

I also entered the tree and found myself in a murky cave illuminated by the daylight from the outside shade beyond the entrance and the opposite exit.
It felt damp and uncomfortable in there. 
Some flat stones were strewn at random over the boggy ground of the floor to serve footholds.
In the center, there stood a huge brazier of sheet iron with its rusty legs of rebar caught in mud. 
The inside and low sides of the brazier were covered entirely with the rough rind of curdled wax drops from the uncountable candles having been burned in it. 
The dismal environs prodded to get out, back into the clear morning.

So out I went and walked off, and with a farewell look at the giant of a sycamore tree I once again shook my head disapproving the ugly knife marks left by self-immortalizers who add their names, and dates, and esoteric symbols to any landmark they can put their hands on. 
The oldest of the mark-scars had crept, along with the bark, for some six meters above the ground.
Cut a couple of centuries ago, the marks got blurred and distended, by the inaudibly flowing time, into obscure unreadable contours over the uneven ripples of the gray bark.

I didn’t take the route which two days ago brought me to the famous tree.
My intention was to go along the ridge of the toombs (so in Karabakh they call the chains of rounded mountains, covered with forests and grass, in contrast to giant “lehrs” raising their ragged stone peaks up into the sky) to bypass coming down to the valley of Karmir-Bazaar but descend from the heights to the highway near the village of Sarushen.
That’s why I followed an almost indiscernible trail taking to the right and up the steep.
I did not know whether my plan was feasible at all but if there’s a trail it would lead somewhere, right?
So I walked along it inhaling sweet fragrance from the infinite varieties of the mountain grass, admiring the fixed waves of the sunlit green toombs, looking forward to the delight with the breathtaking view that would open the moment I had climbed up atop the ridge.

And it turned out just so – a view surpassing the most dainty epithets by Bunin-and-Turgenev as well as the subtlest brush strokes in Ayvazovsky-and-Sarian's pictures – and against that tremendous background, the trail converged with a narrow road ascending from nowhere to the next wooded toomb. 
From the wood over there were coming down, so very tiny at such a distance, figures of two horses, two men, and a dog.

We met in ten minutes. 
The horses dragged three-meter-long tree trunks with the thick ends hitched onto their backs; the tops with peeled off bark kept scraping the road. 
Two boys and a dog escorted the firewood to keep their homes warm next winter.

On entering the wood I met another party of loggers. 
It was of three horses and three men, and no dog.
We exchanged greetings and I asked if it was possible to reach Sarushen going along that chain of toombs.
The woodchopper in a faded red shirt with the skin of his face stuck to the very skull bones answered that he had heard of such a trail but was not familiar with it, and that going on for another three hundred meters I would meet a one-eyed old man cutting wood up there – who knew that wood very well. 

I passed the said distance, then another three hundred meters, and never heard an ax – the old man, probably, was enjoying a long break with a good smoke and sound nap, or, else, dining. 

Before reaching the top of the toomb, the road scattered into a number of paths. 
I took the widest one but it soon disappeared. 
There was just a mountain wood around me where instead of walking you have to climb clinging to the tree trunks.
Some tedious occupation.
Without surmounting the top, I kept moving around it in the hope to find a passage to the next toomb in the ridge.

Suddenly, there was a change.
The sounds of a summer wood died away and the daylight dimmed strangely.
Spots of the sunlight between the tree trunks and bushes disappeared altogether.
Could it be the clouds covered the sky?
Looking around I understood the reason – instead of giants mixed with various undergrowth I was surrounded by frequent trunks of peers whose crowns interlocked at four to five meters above the ground into a dense mass impenetrable for the sun and filled the air with some uncanny touch.

Something made me look back to eye-contact an intent beast stare.
A jackal? Dog?
Ah, none. Look at this brush of a tail, sure, it's a fox. Or maybe a vixen. 
Young, of course, haven't come across hunters yet. 
- Hi, Fox. I'm not a prince. I am not young. Go your way.

I moved on, dodging the long threads of the web, bypassing, at times scrambling through the thorny scrub, and the fox followed.
Who said that animals can’t withstand your fixed look and turn their eyes away?
Bullshit.

And so we went on.
Sometimes I said something to him but he never responded.
At one point I took off my haversack opened it, took out and threw him a piece of bread. 
He didn’t seem to know how to approach it but then ate, holding me in his vigilant sight.
Considering me a potential prey? Don't hurry, dear. 

And only when between the trees ahead appeared a sunlit clearing he began to look around and soon disappeared altogether.
Fare thee well, Young Fox from a young forest.

I went out into the clearing and realized that I had made almost a full circle around the top without finding the passage to the next toomb.
Under the distant cliffs were seen a couple of decayed roofs.
Enough is enough, tired with the search for a supposed trail along the toomb ridge, I switched over to looking for a descent to the abandoned village of Skhtorashen. 

The steep path soon showed up and led me to a deserted mulberry orchard, from where I proceeded to the village spring of delicious water, far more superb to that by the long-liver sycamore.
Then I passed along a thirty-meter stone-cobbled street of two or three houses lost in the vigorously grown blackberry bushes. 
The street ended with a barely discernible track down the slope facing the Karmir-Bazaar valley. 

(… The village of Skhtorashen had been deserted before the Karabakh war, that’s why the houses were not set on fire and the rotten roofs were still in place.
The village, like many others, had been killed by the Soviet leadership half-witted decision, about resettlement of the high mountainous areas population to lower places.
The USSR was drooping then over its seventies into moronic phase. 
However, the then authorities of the Mountainous Karabakh Autonomous Region servilely obeyed the Big Brother and finished off more than one village…)

On the way down the slope a couple more of my attempts at finding a shortcut to the highway was blocked by deep gorges and sheer cliffs, so I reached the highway at exactly the same point where I had left it two days before – near the pavilion-diner ‘Old Sycamore’.

(...a good child is led by fate gently while naughty ones are dragged along by their hair to the same predetermined destination…)

After several turns of a smooth serpentine, the highway took a beeline to the pass from the spacious valley of Karmir-Bazaar.
I trudged along the roadside through the smell of asphalt softened by the heat, panting, sweating, moving the straps of my homemade haversack all over my shoulders but they inevitably started cutting in anyplace.
The salt of sweating ate into my eyes that dropped their frisking around the beautiful views and just gazed dully on the rough asphalt trodden by my army boots and on my shadow commencing to gradually grow less.
And yet at times, my eyes tossed wistful glances ahead looking for a shady tree by the roadside though I knew perfectly well there was not a single one all the way up to the pass. 
Once or twice I left the asphalt in the hope to slacken thirst with blackberries from the bushes down the road shoulder, but we seemed to be facing the blackberry crop failure this year, or else that was a barren stretch – and again me heavy boots were tramping along the relentless steep. 

To get skilled in predicting the future you'd hardly find a better coach than the mountains.

When the straight endless ascend of the  highway reached the pass to change into horizontal winds and twists dictated by the relief of the toombs outside the valley, I could already accurately predict that in half an hour I'd become an indiscernible speck, if looking from here, which would be taking indiscernible turn over that far off slope of a distant toomb and about ten minutes later, before reaching Sarushen, I would leave the highway and follow the dirt road tilting down to the bottom of the Varanda River valley.
And there it would be really nice, with lots of shade under the trees, and the spring of cool water on the rocky river bank…

And everything happened exactly that way, and at the point where the dirt road crossed the shallow riverbed before climbing up to the village of Sarkissashen, I left it and went along the bank, through the hazel thicket to the wide opening.
It was a narrow and surprisingly level field stretching along the foot of the giant toomb on the opposite bank. 

Try to imagine a football field put sloping upright and overgrown with broad-leaf wood up to the very top.
The toomb was so steep that the tree crowns did not screen each other, but succeeded climbing higher and higher, and each one shimmering with its slightly different hue of green. 

Can you imagine that?
If so, then you can easily see me on this here bank stretched out under a huge walnut tree on the mat of its leaves fallen last year and moldered to dry softness.

Here am I looking at the orgy of green on the toomb opposite, and at the blue of the sky above it, and at the quivering sun-bathed leaves overhead.
Ho-ho!
It’s good to lie like that and think about nothing and everything at once.

The only discordant note – there is no one to share all this beauty with.
Cut it out. Forget. 
I'm already used to having the moments of delight when alone. 
But you must keep megalomania in check. 
And never succumb to the notion that the more space is meted out to a person the higher is their rank. 

One day I flipped through a glossy German magazine.
The feature article was all about a certain Herzog, the owner of a large chemical concern.
In short, he’s one of that elite who's above any political rat race leaving that paltry business to presidents, prime ministers, parties and so on, but whose turns of rudder in their personal estates, even for the tiniest fraction of a degree, become decisive for Germany's entire politics.

The article was full of pleasant pictures. 
Among the others, his closeup against the backdrop of his personal backyard park, a really vast one, with blond cupids of his Herzog grandkids playing with toy bows.
His forefathers – wandering Jews paddlers hauled consumer goods from as far as China itself to trade with feudal bandits – dukes, barons and so forth. 
The Gentile barbarians paid the sidelocked Shylocks with all sorts of beastliness.
And now he’s the ruler. The monarch of a wealthy kingdom.
Yet, is he happy?
I strongly doubted it when considering his facial expression midst that well-groomed park of his.

Okay. And me?
Am I happy here, lying under the arboreal canopy, being cooled with soft blows of the breeze from the river, surrounded by so much space all to myself?
A huge domain, indeed, that field overgrown with knee-deep grass and bluish thorns like spiked maces, and that royal toomb, as high as residential towers bulking along the highway between Kiev and the Borispol Airport. 
What else would you need for happiness?
Eh?

Rather interesting a question, by the way...
A sad pity, there's no mirror to knock out a self-diagnosis by the expression of my mug.

The discovery of this place happened six years ago.
That summer the Ministry of Education of the Republic of Mountainous Karabakh, the newly independent and never recognized by the outer world, arranged a tent camp here for the schoolchildren of Stepanakert.

Satenic worked there through all the camp sessions in a row.
My proposal of leaving our dearest kids under my fatherly care and custody had been turned down with a sneer.
So that summer Ashot and Emma spent by their mother side, all the three sessions, in different groups, according to their age and gender. 
The eldest child in our family, Ruzanna, who had just passed her university exams for the second year of study, joined all of them there doing the job of the unpaid Pioneer Leader.

Staying home alone, in two weeks I was bored stiff by silent evenings in our house and one late afternoon I left the city in the direction of Sarushen.
On the way, I bought a pack of cookies and some candies from a petty shop in Stepanakert outskirts. 
(By that time in my life I had already realized that the joy of seeing Daddy should be reinforced and sweetened.) 

Hitchhiking I reached the village and at dark got to the camp.
Approximately in the same spot where I am lying now, there stood the folding canvas stool of the Camp Director, Shavarsh, on which no one except him dared sit down; a local species of the freaking  Coronation Boulder. 
And on the broad trunk of the walnut tree, already then having been split by the lightning, there hung a single but powerful lamp shedding its light into the field and fed by an almost noiseless power generator.

Two long tables of sheet iron arranged in a line at the field edge were accompanied with narrow benches of the same material along their sides.
Two squat pyramids of army tarpaulin tents bulked darkly in the field; one for all the girls at the camp, the other for the boys and the gym teacher.
A little to the left there stood a six-person tent for the Camp Caretakers.
The formation was concluded by a two-person tent for Director Shavarsh and his wife, who also was Cook and Paramedic of the camp.

In the field to the right of the tents, some thirty meters from the tables, a tame campfire was licking with quiet tongues of flame the end of a sizable log, a tree-trunk, actually, which from time to time, when got burned down, was propelled forward into the embers. 

The Caretakers at the camp were, naturally, teachers from the city schools, they identified me in the lamplight and called Satenic.
Ruzanna came running after.
They both were glad to see me, though with a trace of inward strain in Satenic, prepared to call me to order and cut any funny stuff not in tune with the local customs worked-out by millenniums of use.
However, I was not going to fool about with fundamental matters and just behaved and dutifully sat at the table where the camp dinner was in progress and thankfully accepted a plate of porridge, a spoon, and a slice of bread.

And I even made one or two attempts to bite a little bit off that bread, but it was not for plastic teeth, so I inconspicuously put it aside and switched to the porridge.

(...How come that this make-believe pioneer camp from the happy Soviet times popped up in the country whose Minister of Education confessed, in a fit of openness, that his ministry cannot even buy a football for School 8?
Supposedly, the Diaspora provided a target grant and at the end of summer the oversea philanthropists would receive a report:
“Thanks to the $40.000 of your generous donation, all the schoolchildren of the Stepanakert-City, the capital of the Republic of Mountainous Karabakh, were presented with the unique opportunity to...”)

The composition of a report to the hypothetical donors from the presumed grant-rippers was interrupted by the happy squeaks of Emma snuggling to my side.
I fondly stroke her straight hair and the narrow back of a preschool child; asked some casual questions; she answered and asked me back. 
‘And where’s Ashot? D’you know?’
She pointed to the far end of the next table where the light from the lamp merged with the night gloom.
Ashot sat there, forgetful of the meal, watching with delight the high school teenagers towering about him with their nonstop rookery cackling.  

I took the biscuits and candies out from the pocket of my summer jacket and gave to Emma to share with her brother.
She quietly walked away.

Then there was a dinner for adults.
The Caretakers, all of them females recruited from among the city school teachers, modestly drank wine.
Director, gym teacher, the precinct policeman from a neighboring village, and I were sharing mulberry vodka.
We had a snack of a small fry, which the policeman in the afternoon banged in the river with an electric discharge from the generator borrowed from the camp. 
The catch was fried by Cook, aka Paramedic, aka Director’s wife.

A group of teenagers approached the table with a petition to Shavarsh to allow some dancing and he graciously decreed a half an hour delay for going to beds.
Meanwhile, I asked Ruzanna about Ashot. 
She answered that he was already sleeping in the tent and volunteered to go and wake him up, but I said, no, don't disturb. 

The teenagers gathered by the fire to dance to the music from the loudspeaker box hanging from the tree next to the walnut with the lamp.
At first, it was a puzzle to me why they all danced with their backs to the feast under the lamp, but then I cracked it – everyone danced with their personal shadow cast off into the field by the lamplight. 
Then Director ordered the generator to be turned off and retired to his royal double tent.

Some of the camping teenagers, in twos and threes, sneaked to the quietly glowing log to scare each other with spooky stories, as old as the hills, and to laugh at the timeless jokes up to one or two past midnight under the supervision of the Caretakers, their school teachers, taking turns.
I stayed there till one o’clock and then agreed to go to sleep on a vacant camp-cot in the boys’ tent leaving Satenic to do her turn by the fire.
I had to leave the camp at six in the morning to catch the bus to Stepanakert...

Years later I asked Ashot why he did not come up to me that night. 
He answered that he was told about my visit only the following day when I already had left the camp. 
To my question about the biscuits and candies, he shook his head in bewilderment. 

I don’t blame Emma. 
At the age of six, to finish quiet off a pack of biscuits that turned up along that camp rations is a normal manifestation of healthy selfishness.
Yet, poor Ashot! 
How does it feel to grow up knowing, though that knowledge has been buried by you long ago and hardly ever pops up at all, but still and yet remains with you, that your father did not want to come up to you?
From all of the family only to you, your father did not want to come up…

Well, let bygone be bygones, or, quoting the sage saying of my concluding mother-in-law, Emma Arshakovna:
‘It's life, see?' 

Eeewwwww! 
This secluded luxurious space really flattened me.
To hell nostalgic sentiments! 
It’s time for venville hooliganism.

Bypassing thickets on the steep slope, I explore the underwood along the field edge, pulling a broken bough here, a dead sapling there onto the desolate cowpath.
Advancing in that manner some two hundred meters, I turn around and go back picking up the firewood scattered over the path.
With an ample armful of it I come back to the former campsite, then re-track after another bundle, and another.
That’s it.

The next point on agenda is breaking brushwood for a fire and baking "pioneers' favorite food-ood-ood", as a popular Soviet song called potatoes. 
I have to do the task with bare hands because I’m not equipped with even a knife.

Sometimes people get amazed at my hiking without any weapon and start to scare me with wolves or robbers.
However, in all my annual escapes to wilderness, I only saw foxes and deer, and bear footprints a couple of times, but no robbers ever cared to ambush me in the toombs. 

Though one time I got attacked.

I was spending the night under a bush in the vicinity of the Mekdishen village, in my sleeping bag wrapped over with a piece of blue synthetic burlap.
(The shoddy crap soaks through in the rain, but I did not have this Chinese tent then.)
Sometime about midnight two wolfhounds, escorting their master on horseback, ran into me lying there.
Eek! 
How they barked above my head!

Their master arrived at the scene with his flashlight and was perplexed by the puzzling sight in his native quarters, but the blue sack on the ground yelled that it was a tourist from Stepanakert and let him call back his beasts. 
The mujik started the familiar blah-blah about the wolves but I replied that after the encounter with his dogs nothing would ever frighten me at all. 

And when I climbed the Dizzappat, that is the third highest mountain in Karabakh, half an hour later there came up a group of guys from the Halo Trust.
It's an international organization with their headquarters in Great Britain that finances and teaches the natives in the hot spots the techniques of mine clearance.
The conflicting sides, as a rule, set lots of minefields for each other.

So, the sappers had come atop the Dizzappat for a mahtagh because there is a stone chapel from time immemorial which you must walk three times around for your request to be accepted by the forces dealing with fate.
The Halo Trust guys brought a rooster with them for the sacrificial offering.
However, their mahtagh was somewhat spontaneous and hasty and they forgot to bring a knife with them and were disappointed that neither had I.
Nonetheless, they invented a new technique and chopped off the offering's head with a shard of a broken bottle found in the heap of garbage left by all the previous mahtagh-doers. 

And only that year when I climbed the Keers, the second highest peak in the region, I had an imitation of the Swiss army knife presented to me by Nick Wagner.
It had a lot of things in its handle – a fork, a corkscrew, and even a nail file. 
I can't remember where I misplaced it afterward. 

But, however long I would swagger before you, the peak number one is absent from the peacock tail of my vagrant achievements.
The front line of the unfinished war between Armenians and Azerbaijanis crosses that mountain. 
So, if not one side, then another wouldn't let me pass up, or else they'd bang from both sides synchronously. 

That is to say, that breaking dried branches by hand is not such a big problem and before long I have readied two sizable heaps of fuel for the fire. 
With the first burned up, I'll bury unpeeled potatoes in the hot ashes and renew the fire on top of them with another heap. 
But not right now, because I have to set the tent up; the sun has already gone behind this wheeling football field of a toomb and the dusk starts creeping from the river…

(...any human being is a pyromaniac to some extent. 
‘And pyromaniacs ate pies with Pirosmani...’
At first, it looks like an unfinished tongue twister, but then there slowly emerges a disjunctive question: was Pirosmani also at the table, or in the pies as a filling?.) 

To prevent setting the whole field on fire, I walk round and round about the fire, stopping the fugitive flames with the long club I couldn’t break at wood-crashing.
And now the bonfire is bordered with the black ring of burnt down grass. 
The club-armed sentry turns into an idle onlooker watching frisk flame tongues dancing on the wood pieces.
The club becomes a staff to lean my locomotion apparatus on. 
And what do you see in the flames of a fire or in the shimmering glow of breaking up coals?

(...we were a seed, a germ, then buds, then branches…)

Now, turning the staff into a poker, I rake their smoldering reminiscences, push them aside to prepare a hole for a dozen potatoes; breakfast and dinner – two in one.

The fire eats wood, I eat potatoes, mosquitoes eat me…

(… who do not eat, they do not live. 
Even such a goody-goody as a crystal devours space when growing. 
But no one can ever devour time because it does not exist at all. 
Time is just a red-herring to fool naive suckers.
What they call ‘time’ is just the series of different states of space.
Some place sunlit from the left is morning, the same place sunlit from the right is evening. 
As simple as that. 
Day as a unit of time? 
Bullshit!
Day is the difference between two states of space.
An apple and an apple adds up to a pair of them and not a unit of time. 

There, there! Don't get scared, my girl. 

Yes, I'm a bit spacey on the point of space and time. 
A brush in passing with that sweet couple and—ta-dah!—there is a short circuit and I start babbling unreasonable nonsense.
Some freaking reincarnation of Vasily the Blessed only cocked up by different subjects.
But I am not a violent case. 
No-no. 
Both God and Devil could testify it.
The process is taking a quiet course – the hooey I pore out is more than enough to entangle myself and—voilà!—here am I, the willingly obedient yahoo ready to carry on what they would care to burden me with...) 
