~~~ The Postscripts ~~~

The plan of the inevitable parting with Konotop arose just last autumn when I saw that everything was repeating itself. 
Again I was smack-bang in the middle of the tunnel cut through the stratum of black night darkness with the batteries of floodlights on the metal illumination pylons in the classification yard kindling the moist gleam along the tired rails. 
The tunnel was higher and wider than in the Dophinovka mine and instead of the narrow gauge rails the mighty tracks were bifurcating, multiplying, flowing alongside each other.
They were filled with freight cars, cisterns, platforms on which piled up all sorts of covered and uncovered, overall and small, tied up and poured in stuff.
With clanging on the railway points, rolling cars went down the hump, single and in blocks, to find their way in the bowl and screeching the wheel chocks came to a halt at their destinations.

The classification yard has no weekends.
On and on sounds the round-the-clock rumbling, clanging, screeching, shouting of the loudspeakers about the tracks with marshaled trains.

But all that went on in the tunnel, in one giant tunnel.
Would the roof withstand the weight of the night?

And on that autumn night, I as usual crossed the railways along the all too familiar trails of the service paths, bypassing the maze of the still trains and dodging the cars rolling down the hump, and was already near the ever open gape of the breach in the fence around the PMS-119. 
I 'ughed!' disgusting beforehand the mud and puddles waiting for me in that hole.
It was at a stone throw because of I walked already along the meter-tall letters of the inscription on the concrete wall. 
Made with ever-black tar over the light gray concrete of fencing with assured strokes of a master, it informed the passengers of trains passing by in the daylight:
‘Konotop – the city of nondrinkers’

The left behind floodlights pinned my moving shadow onto the wall. 
The closer to the hole, the smaller the size of the silhouette with jerking hat brims until it was swallowed with the pitch black darkness of the breach.

The time machine is a good invention, yet if you can’t afford it try traveling the time on foot.
Now, following my disappeared shadow, I'll get in such medieval swamps and darkness that… 

‘Sophocles! Aeschylus!’
Damn!
I seem to take a too wide stride and slipped through to the antiquity, eh?

‘Aeschylus!’
A black shadow about twenty meters from the breach roared hoarsely in the muddy darkness of the PMS backyards. 

Mine?
No, this one shorter and plumper.
And in a leather cap, the coat’s also of leather.

‘Why pulled up? Who called you? As if you had the slightest notion of Sophocles.' 
‘Right you are. I never went deeper than Aristophanes.’
He hiccuped and, slightly rolling, but resolutely, stepped in my way.
‘Who are you?’ demanded he with the moonshine on his breath.
‘A passer-by. And what brought you here?’
He seemed not to have heard the question.
‘Sophocles.. Aeschylus..’ he echoed eerily. ‘Yes, yes.. Aeschylus.. Aristophanes! And who else?!’
‘Well, there also some Euripides.’
‘Right! Euripides!’ he cried out with a tear in his voice and again groaned devotedly, ‘Sopho-ocles!’

We stood to face each other like Sancho Panza and Don Quixote meeting after the separation. 
Sancho gave out a despondent sob and dropped his head. 
The peak of the leather cap pecked me in the bridge of the nose.
Damn it, Sancho! Look out! My visor is up… 

‘I’m an artist,’ imparted he plaintively, raising his head. ‘They gave me two months here...’
Another nod with the pesky peak.
I see, two months from Narco-2 to eradicate alcoholic inclinations.
And I know now the whose masterpiece in tar is out there. 
Eh, Sancho, Sancho!. Anyone would turn a drunk if there's no one to talk with about Sophocles!.. 
A whole armful of pearls and no one to scatter them before…

No, no, no!
I had to leave…
...to go there, beyond the horizon, to the faraway—as childhood—shore of the blue sea, where there stands the sacred oak tree with a hollow to whisper into it the quotations hardly needed by anyone and names of long-forgotten sages… 

The plan was perfect.
But what about the details?
For instance, where to?
Well, firstly, it should be some warm place, enough of frost bites for me, and secondly, where there are the sea and mountains. 
The Crimea does not fit, its mountains are not so tall, besides, it's occupied by Olga. 
The finger creeps along the map to Baku.
Well? 
Okay.

Getting the vacation from the construction workshop floor of the ‘Motordetail' plant, I applied for the dismissal. 
Yet I still had one business on hands, before leaving.
My promise to the three strangers in the restaurant at the station to visit the city of Lvov... 

The closer to Lvov the slower the train traveled along the slopes of the Carpathian Mountains with tall dark fir trees but still arrived at the destination in the evening. 

In the automatic storage cell, I left my briefcase, where besides the hygienic necessities, a gray cap of thick woolen fabric also lurked, so that to travel lightly through the city in the inseparable from me hat of a secret agent.

Lvov always was a beautiful city with lots of monuments and landmarks of ancient architecture and cobblestone streets. 
And no wonder, that the 4-sequel Soviet adaptation of ‘The Three Musketeers’ was shot there.
They only needed to keep the camera away from the tram rails in the cobbled pavement. 
I did not use any kind of transportation in Lvov but went on foot. 

Where?

To the Opera House.
My promise was fulfilled, I had come to Lvov, but I had no intention to run around its streets with the question:
‘Have you, by chance, been passing through Konotop two years ago, possibly, after you were back from the zone?' 
I don’t belong to that category.
I strolled in a well-bred manner and had a good time because the train to Kiev was leaving exactly at midnight...

The Opera House in Lvov was a magnificent sight, simply a palace; well done the Poles who had built it.
However, about having a good time my guess was premature.
There was an opera on, a creation of a local classical composer about the peasant unrest in the 16th century.
A poor job in the style ‘they’ll eat it up!’
But if a job is once begun, never leave it till it's done and I firmly sat through all of it to the final bell that set me free.

By midnight, I was back to the station, unlocked the automatic storage cell and opened my briefcase.
I doffed my hat and put it inside the cell, then clapped the gray cap from the briefcase on my head. 
Then I gently closed the door and even giggled because of I imagined the reaction of the next user of the same cell.
You open the door and see a solitary hat sitting there without a head.
Go and think what to think…

On return to Konotop, I started the farewell visits.
To my brother Sasha on the Sosnovska street.
To my sister Natasha in the At-Seven-Winds.
I did not go to 13 Decemberists, I was a jackass.

Natasha gave me a rich present – a new winter coat of gray cloth with karakul fur collar.
Apparently, the size did not fit her husband Guena, I was the coat size.

I also went to ZAGS to get the stamp in my passport on divorce with Eera.
They sent me to Nezhin ZAGS where our marriage had been registered.
The Nezhin ZAGS demanded a reference from Konotop people’s court that our marriage was terminated.
“Look,’ said I, ‘you made the record of our divorce when she was getting her stamp, give me my stamp on that ground and that’s it.’
‘There is no such record. She never addressed us.’
That how they stroke me dumb.

I had to go to Konotop, to get the reference in the court and take it back to Nezhin.
Shuttling in local trains forth and back, I thought whether the mileage I had driven on trains would equal the Equator. 
And I also thought: why did Eera, in so many years, not put in her passport the stamp certifying our divorce? 
Probably, to add sort of a spice to her datings.
Like, adding twigs to the horns of her cuckold husband of a geologist while he was away.

And then I realized why I always liked the scene of D’Artagnan farewell to Rochefort in the novel ‘Twenty Years Later’

‘Go your way, old devil,' D'Artagnan said with a sad smile, looking after the departed Rochefort. ‘Go. Anyway, there is no more Constance...' 

I realized, that Constance was Eera and me.
Only not separately, but together.
Constance was us when we tortured each other with our love...

Then I went to Sumy.
There I took Lenochka to the movie.
It was ‘Fanfan-Tulip’, only it was Alain Delon already starring in it.
In the park we fed the swans, dropping from the arched bridge crumbs of cabbage piroshki, and then we went to a restaurant.
Everything there was a wonder for her.
She saw me off at the station and burst into tears for a farewell. 
She looked beautiful, like her mother and only the hair she took after me. 

The next day I went to 25, Gogol street and left by Sasha Plaksin my black dembel ‘diplomat’ case loaded with dictionaries and a couple of books.
We arranged he would send it to me when I settle down somewhere and let him know my address.

Konotop saw me off with angry cold and wind, but the coat from Natasha kept me warm and I went to Nezhin to return the book of stories by Salinger borrowed from Zhomnir.

I locked the sports bag with clothes and other things in an automatic storage cell at the station and with just the briefcase went to the Shevchenko street. 
At my ringing the bell, the door did not open, probably, Zhomnir and Maria Antonovna went out somewhere to visit. 

I went to the city center to the new ‘Kosmos’ cinema opposite the department store.
There was some garbage from ‘Uzbek-film’ about Sindbad the Seaman, but I just needed to kill time.
I sat down and set my briefcase under the seat.

The place on the left was taken by a woman of my age.
In the sloping passage on the right, a girl about four was running up and down. 
Her mother, sitting in the front rows, called to her to come back but the kid did not listen.
She kept capering there and addressing each of entering the hall male spectators with a yell ‘Daddy!’
But he was not among them.

A couple of rows higher, five meters to the left, were a pair of pilots in officer jackets.
One of then began to greet my neighbor on the left, but somehow with owner's air and hidden double bottom meaning. 

The movie began and Sindbad switched from the sea to a cave to fencing a saber next to the ruins of the ancient walls of Samarkand against the background of a high-voltage power line.
Finally, the movie ended, I lifted my cap from my knees and put it on my head.

The neighbor on the left dropped her thin gloves into the lap of my coat.
‘Take it,’ said she quietly. ‘Escort me.’

I got my briefcase from under the seat and began to squeeze after her through the crowd.
In a rather dense stream of moviegoers, we descended the high exit stairs outside. 
The officers-pilots were waiting down in their forage caps.
As we passed they did not even dare to peep.
Did not get the nerve.

First, the karakul collar, to which they would hardly grow, in the Soviet army such collars were prerogative of the colonels and higher ranked Commanders.
Secondly, my gray brand new cap in the favorite style of zeks after their two terms in the zone.
Not to mention the equally new briefcase.

She invited me to tea.

It was not far, in the five-story block on the slope from the main square.
I walked and the location was getting more and more familiar to me.
Really?
It cannot be… Exactly!

She opened with her key the apartment where once the black-haired KGBist arranged for me to meet his boss in a stylish haircut of his gray hair above the tanned face.

But now the apartment was furnished and lived in.
We undressed in the hallway and went to the living room.
On the coffee table before the sofa, instead of tea, she served a bottle of wine, sliced sausage, and chocolate sweets. 
I drank wine, snacked chocolate and remembered the crane operator Vitalya.

We did not ask each other's names. 
For what we were there ‘you’ were enough.
True, she couldn’t resist boasting, that she worked in the prosecutor’s office.
Without specifying my job I assured her they wouldn’t run me down in her beat.

She went into the bedroom and came back in a long unbuttoned dressing gown.
She sat next to me on the sofa again.
I hugged her, ran my hand under the gown collar around her neck until reached and unfastened the bra on her blades. 
Her face brightened up with joy.
We went into the bedroom.

What was after might be compared to the demonstration performances of champions in figure skating.
The simile to match her body physique.
Like well-trained partners, we accurately and precisely entered all those supports, triple two-loops, and other program elements. 
Of all the program two-loops element was especially advantageous for outlining shapely curves of her slender body. 
We moved from figure to figure with fancy changes of tempo and on the fly improvisations in combinations and continued to conquer the hearts of absent spectators with our unsurpassable skill.
The rapture with ashes being hauled. Sweet bliss. 

That’s only in the ripples of streaming sensuality there, for some reason, splashed up some sketchy thoughts of a f-f.. frisking Tuzik.. and a rubber hot-water bottle.. to sport with, in a secluded nook.

Which Tuzik?!
What did a rubber bottle have to do with it?
All that was happening was a streamlined execution of the program from a novel by Carpentier which I recently read in ‘Vsesvit’.
There too, the main character, before going to Spain to fight in the ranks of the International Brigades against General Franco, was having a sex with his girlfriend three times in their farewell night...

In the morning she at last made tea and I called Zhomnir to tell that I had brought his book and was on my way to his place. 

Yet, I did not go to Zhomnir at once. 
I returned to the Gogol Greens and entered a hairdresser’s in the cobweb of adjoining old streets.
They did not expect to have a so early customer, yet one of the hairdressers agreed to shave me.

That young make-believe hairdresser of a gypsy girl several times nicked my throat.
At each scratching she said ‘oh!’ and rubbed the cut with pliable alum.
And she even had the nerve to take the fee after!

I again passed the Greens and entered School 7.
There was a lesson in progress and the corridors were deserted and silent.
In the teachers' room, I said to the few present women than I wanted to see Liliana Ogoltsova from a second grade, whose dad I was. 
One of the women came out into the empty corridor with me and led to the right classroom.

She went in and returned with a girl I did not know, with her ashy hair in a pair of tight plaits, wearing a gray knitted blouse with thin transverse stripes in its front, with her eyes stubbornly and irrevocably turned aside.
‘This is the girl,’ said the teacher, ‘but she says she does not have a dad.’

‘That's right,' I answered holding back the anger with I did not know what, that had come from nowhere. ‘Is he a father who shows up once in five years just to say goodbye?' 
The teacher tactfully walked to the window nearby.

I opened my briefcase and went down on one knee next to you so that we were even. 
You did not look at me.

‘Liliana,’ I called and took out from my briefcase the ‘Morning Star’ newspaper and handed it to you.
‘Pass it to your mother.’
You accepted the folded newspaper and stood silently, staring at the floor. 
‘All right, Lee,' said I, 'Go back to your classroom.' 
You turned with relief and walked to the door of your class.

I got up from my knee and watched as the door swallowed you and the newspaper, where between the printed pages there was an enlarged portrait of Eera standing in the summer stream, and the pack of all the postcards I received and telegrams too about how you two loved me and congratulated with my birthday or the Day of the Soviet Army...

I handed Salinger to Zhomnir and in return, I asked for James Joyce's Ulysses, 705 pages of dense text without pictures, without divisions into parts or chapters. 
Zhomnir himself once wanted to translate it, but Joyce turned out too unsuitable for the conjuncture. 
I gave my word to return the volume in ten years.
After a split-second hesitation, he brought the book out of his archive chamber and handed to me.
So I had with what to fill the eternity measured out for me.

‘Where are you going?’ asked Maria Antonovna.
‘To Baku.’

With the usual push, the train pulled out from the Nezhin railway station.
Everything was behind, ahead was everything.
Thirty and three years.

‘It’s time for you to work miracles,’ once said I to a saxophonist I knew when he was thirty-three.
‘I have already done miracles,’ he answered.
‘And served my time for them too.’
And how only do them folks manage to find time for everything?


I thought that I was going to Baku to pick up a job for a bricklayer of the fourth category and gradually translate Ulysses in the evenings.
As it turned out, I went to the Mountainous Karabakh with its war for independence with all the issuing events on which I’d rather won’t dwell.

However, behind the windows of the local train car, there were still running familiar landscapes of 1987, the last year of peace. 
Before the collapse of the indestructible Union of the Free Republics, there remained two years.

Today they tell me that in 1987 the smack of the new era was already in the air.
Forgive me, I did not scent it.

(...what was the reason for the collapse of the USSR?
The Union was finished off by ‘The Guys on the Roadside’.
That was the name of the English TV movie of four sequels about the life of British unemployed.
The censors of the central television did not get it that at the end of that week an electrician at the ‘Motordetail’ plant would say:
‘I have been working all my life, and so has my wife.
Our son returned from the army and he also works.
We live in a two-room apartment and their unemployed live in two-story cottages! Fuck!’

The magic power of art touched the living strings in the heart of a Konotop mujik triggering the chain reaction that changed the face of the world.
Has it changed its essence, or was it just plastic surgery?..)

Let some other ‘I’ strain their brains about this question because of the predawn twilight seeping through the canvass of my Chinese tent notifying the end of this sleepless night and this endless letter of mine to you.

You will ask how did my further life flow behind the watershed of the Caucasian ridge?
You may even not ask it, I will tell all the same.

First, do not ask about my life in the past tense, it still continues to flow further.
I rolled its way as best as I could.

Because of the spiral nature of the current, we can only go through multiple repetitions of what has been and will be.
‘What has been will be again,' says the new translation of the Old Testament and Vladimir Dahl in his dictionary recorded the same saying in normal, human language – 'radish is no sweeter than a horseradish'. 
But, may I ask, do all those wisdom pieces helped a single anyone?

And when there comes the moment to feel that I don’t care a f-f.. fig, I do not resist and go with the flow to the end.

Life is predetermined like a winding mountain road with a drop-off on the right and the wall on the left, here you go repeating step by step the path passed before you by you who was also ‘I’.
Of course, when I recognize the repetition of familiar situations, I try not to repeat ugly deeds for which I am then painfully ashamed.
And up till now I, like, have managed to dodge.
Or?. 
Yes, like, haven’t stepped…
If only that bitter son of a bitch in my Chinese tent wouldn’t unearth something else…

So here we are – I and the Varanda.
It goes to meet the Araks river and I pass by and on, to the last limit beyond which is the boundless blue sea and, probably, the once lost sailing boat in it… 

Something again carries me to all sorts of epochs with philologies.
But this is, after all a private letter of a father to his daughter, and f-f.. fairly didactic too, well.. sort of... at certain passages... 
Seems it’s really the high time to wind up.

(...and the morning of the following day came and Scheherazade was suffered to live that day also…)

And about myself, dear daughter, I may report that the maxim ‘I know that I know nothing’ is not applicable to me, though there were times when I also flashed this particular pearl.
Today, however, I have serious doubts about even so tiny scraps of knowledge.
I doubt that I know anything at all, even be it nothing.

‘We understand life only by looking back at the past,’ announced a lover of aphorisms.
Asshole! You will not understand it even when pulled out of the grave and poked into it with your noseless skull!
And no one will understand…

There’s just one thing beyond any doubt – life is shorter than even the dash between the dates of birth and death.

And I do not care that everyone does not care about my wisdom because I know better than all of them that after all that was, after my stupidities and mistakes, after stepping in all sorts of shit, I am not a hair-breadth wiser, I am still the same naive sucker ready to get underway to the unseen Wherewhere Mountains.

And let the hull is old like hell, the mast all cracks, and the whole this nut shell will not survive the nearest storm –  ahead, at full tilt!
And let another calypso or penelope (what's the difference?) tearing the blouse on her charms, cries out and rushes along the foamy water edge – full ahead!. 

There is only one consolation that the remaining part of the dash is shorter already than the past one, so no fear – we will prick through! 
Like hell will anything stop a hooey pricker!

Good-bye, dear daughter.
My loving hug to you.
And, since you are in favor of ‘You’ in plural  –

With love,
your daddies: Sehrguey and Nikolayevich.

(...and whichever rumors reach you, you know firmly – we lived happily ever after and died on the same day…)

P. S.:
in case you will give birth to a baby-son – look out!
And if you notice an excessive interest for paper, or if instead of games in the computer he starts playing with text typing, then wrap him in a white cloth and throw into the fast-running river and he’ll be grateful to you later on.

P. P. S.:
almost forgot to warn that any coincidence with the names of real persons is absolutely random because any graphomaniac has the right to creative fiction and most weird fantasies

on the night of 20 to 21 August 2007,
on the left bank of the river Varanda...

