~~~The Genesis~~~

You don't know much of your genealogical lineage on the paternal side, right?
In contrast to your mother's family tree which her Mom, your grandmother, described to you at least two generations deep.
So I suppose.
The suspicion of my pedigree being neglected took roots after your mother informed me in her letter about my death.

Well, actually, she wrote that she had told you that your Dad was dead and I was expected not to stress the fragile psyche of the child with showing her her father's ghost.

And here's the answer why ever since if in a pub the mujik next to me began to bend my ear that it’s now that he’s nobody but were the times that saw him being the Chief Mate at a nuclear submarine, then I, with firmly grounded right and clear conscience, drove it home to him that I was a famous pilot who got killed at test flights on a secret type of a jet fighter.
By the by, for that feat, I was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union together with the Gold Star medal. 
Posthumously, of course.
A sad pity the award didn’t find the hero.
They had never tried hard enough...

In fact, it was not me to invent the bullshit.
In that romantic era when the growing child of a single mother started asking her questions about the incomplete family composition, the Mom’s excuse, traditionally, sounded as follows:
‘Your Father was a pilot and he died in a flight.’
The straightforward prose of life was reserved for her bosom friends:
‘Damn it, lady-friends, he spread me on the office desk and till my life's end I'll remember the fucking abacus that rolled hither-thither under my ass…' 

However, do not expect a particularly in-depth outline of your ancestry because of my own ignorance – the study of eugenics was frowned at at those times.

The mother of your father’s mother was named Katerina Poyonk and your great-grandfather, Joseph Vakimov, a commissar in the 1-st Cavalry Army of Semyon Budyonny, brought her from Poland as a trophy, or maybe a keepsake of that period of the Civil War when Budyonny’s cavalry nearly captured Warsaw.

Their relationship was legalized by the then Civil Registry Office, aka ZAGS, and eight years later my mother, Galina, was born followed by her brother, Vadim, and later on by their sister, Lyudmila.

In reminiscences of those three, Joseph was very clever. 
He knew Jewish and German languages and was a Regional Trade Auditor in Ukraine.
During that period Katerina had a separate pair of shoes for each of her dresses.

Seven years later, in the late thirties, Joseph was arrested.
He was not shot away (apparently he found ways to cleverly buy his life back) and only deported to a very northern, however, European part of Russia. 
The family followed him and at the beginning of the forties they all returned to Ukraine and lived in the city of Konotop, soon afterward captured by the German Wehrmacht. 

Two years later, at the end of the Nazi occupation, when German troops retreated westward under the blows of the Red Army my grandfather disappeared from home one day before the liberation together with his bicycle; a very valuable thing in those times.
Next morning, Katerina and her three children fled from the shelling to the suburban village of Podlipnoye, where a fragment of a shell cut an apple branch a few centimeters above my mother’s head; an important detail if not for those centimeters I wouldn’t be composing this letter to you now.

By noon, the advancing troops of the Red Army liberated both the village and the city. 
Katerina came back to Konotop where she brought up, as a single mother, her children: Galina, Vadim, and Lyudmila.

In the early fifties, her eldest daughter, Galina, by means of acquaintance by correspondence met Nikolai Ogoltsoff, a petty officer in the Order of Combat Red Banner Black Sea Fleet.

‘Acquaintance by correspondence’ means that the postman would bring a letter starting with the words:
‘Hello, unknown Galina...’
and finishing with:
‘...send me your photo, please!’

And the following year, on his vacation, Nikolai, instead of visiting his native Ryazan Region in Russia, arrived in the Ukrainian city of Konotop.

The flaring width of his black Navy pants and of his chest under the striped vest, his sailor's cap with golden-lettered inscription 'The Black Sea Fleet' above his forehead and two black ribbons on behind, the shining anchor in his belt plate impressed the quiet streets of the Konotop outskirts where he looked for the address to which he had been sending his letters:
‘fly with my greetings, come back with the promise of meetings’.
And three days later my parents, without asking my grandmother, registered their marriage in the city ZAGS.

Was my missing grandfather a Jew?

Being a commissar in the years of the Civil War, proficiency with the language in question, and even his name could be considered a circumstantial evidence to the assumption.

However, the high percentage of the chosen people's children among the revolutionary leaders does not remove the possibility of exceptions. 
The language he might have learned being a shop assistant at a store of some Jew.
As for the name, then even such a hardened anti-Semite as Comrade Stalin was his namesake.

Nevertheless, my mother preferred to introduce herself as Galina Osipovna.
She inherited her dark mellow eyes from Katerina Ivanovna (or Katarzyna Janovna?) who hardly belonged to the tribes of Israel.
Firstly, in the red corner of her kitchen there hung a dark lacquered board with some gloomy-bearded saint (I can't say of which religion or nationality, could be a Catholic as well). 
Besides, in her shed she fattened a pig, Masha was her name, for slaughter. 

But, again, the icon might have taken root as a camouflaging part of the interior in the time of the Nazi occupation, and the kosher diet restrictions can be refuted with the Ukrainian proverb: 
‘Need will teach to eat cakes with ham’.

Of course, all these unanswerable questions will arise after the return of your ancestors from their marriage registration at the Konotop ZAGS, but we are not to follow them along with all that way, we are taking a U-turn – to trace the line of your grandfather's father's origin. 

His line is simple, straight, and down-to-earth. 
In a word – Mikhail Ogoltsoff was a peasant.

In the depths of the Ryazan land there is the district center of Sapozhok and at a distance of nine to eleven kilometers from it (depending on who you have asked) the village of Kanino. 
My father boasted that in its fat days the village had about four hundred households.

A shallow ravine with a noiseless lazy stream along its bottom divides the village in two.
In the blessed days of yore, the stream banks served the grounds for the ancient folk amusement “the battling walls”, aka a collective fist-fight.
The folks from one half of the village were in earnest punching mugs of the other half's villagers and hitting their teeth out to celebrate some church holiday or just a bright Sunday day.
People knew then how to entertain themselves.
And so it went on for centuries before sinking into oblivion.

Only vague memories remained of Alesha the Saddler – the legendary fighter and obedient son. 
But his Dad was really strict! 
‘Where to?' he would shout at his son. 'So filthy rich you are, eh? Sit tight and do the work!' 
And the mighty thirty-year-old son would stoop his bulky shoulders over the unfinished horse-collar, poking it with his awl while all of him was there, by the stream, from where little boys were breathlessly running in with the updates: 
‘Oh, Alesha! They are pressing indeed! Ours giving way!’
Yet the warning snort from his father would keep Alesha silent and concentrated on his toil until many 'a-heck!' and heavy blows sounds of a dogged retreat became heard in the hut. 
At this point, Dad would no longer keep down his wrath. 
Springing up on his feet he would run to Alesha and deal him a huge box on the ear with a shout: 
‘Fuck it! They make ours bite the dust but this dickhead still sits home!’
But Alesha didn’t hear him, he’s already out of the door bypassing the battling “walls” through village backyard kitchen gardens, because of the rules forbid attacking the opposite “wall” from behind, good game calls for fair play.
‘Alesha’s out!’
And “ours” at once get a second breath while the opposite “wall” shows streaks of wavering.
Some weaklings have started falling down in advance: the rules do not allow to beat a lying one.
And Alesha determinately knocks the standing fighters out one after another; and, mark you, without a single f-f.. foul word.
Yeap, the village was in the pink then…

The Rural Collectivization in the USSR finished off that innocent merry-making.
The Great Hunger, organized to promote the process of the socialist changes in the village life of Russia, knocked Alesha off, and his father, of course, starved to death also.

My father’s mother, Martha, remembered the life under the rule of Tsar because of at the break of the Great October Revolution she was a girl of thirteen or fourteen.
Ten years later she was already married to Mikhail Ogoltsoff to bring forth three children – Kolya, Sehrguey, and Alexandra (respectively).

Mikhail survived the start of collectivization but the Great Hunger made him pass on and Martha remained a single mother.
She cooked soup of saltbush and less edible herbs. 
Both she and her children were swelling up from starvation but survived. 

Then arrived the era of hard labor at the collective farm, aka kolkhoz, with its miserly paid workdays.
Life was spinning around those ‘workdays’ earned by slaving in the kolkhoz fields and recreation at the kolkhoz club where twice a month they brought Soviet movies.
To make movie-watching possible, the youngsters of the village had to rotate the crank of a portable dynamo machine generating electricity for the film projector.

In the summer of 1941, Joseph Stalin announced the treacherous invasion of fascist Germany into the Soviet Union. 
The village mujiks were driven to the war.

The Germans never reached Kanino though the thunder of the front-line cannonade was rolling in from the horizon.
Then in the village came detachments of the Red Army reserve, the mujiks from Siberia with their astounding custom to take a steam bath and then sit in the open in the frost of a winter night and have a smoke with just their undershirts on.
The Siberians left in the direction of the cannonade and soon afterward it was not heard anymore.

In the village, besides the silence, remained only women, girls and boys too young to be drafted. 
And—yes!—the collective farm chairman; a one-armed cripple.
And so it went on and on, not for days or weeks but for months, from year to year.
Under the circumstances, among the womenfolk there cropped up certain deviations.
They were gathering in one or another hut, inspecting one or another vagina of theirs, exchanging comments and judgments – whose one was more beautiful.

Getting on the scent of this Sapphism Renaissance, the kolkhoz chairman, in order to eradicate that lesbian flexion before the rumors of it reach the district leadership, called a general meeting of exclusively women and girls in the kolkhoz club.
The male youths participated too, but secretly.
They crawled to the projectionist booth in the club and, with their jaws hung, witnessed the chairman yelling all kinds of curses at the congregation and repeatedly knocking his only fist on the desk when he solemnly swore to cut out that rotten cunt-watching.

(I soften, of course, the bucolic directness of the chairman's speech.)
My father never knew if the cripple managed to keep his promise because he (my father) was drafted into the Red Army.
Or rather, in this case, it was not the Army but the Navy.

The WWII was burning out yet kept devouring the cannon fodder at no less rate.

A youth from a Ryazan village, Kolya, together with lots of youths from other places was outfitted with the black Navy jacket and for a couple of months kept at a recruit depot to get drilled military basics and know ‘Attention!' from ‘Dismissed!'.
They were also taught to distinguish the bayonet of a rifle from its trigger and finally put on high-speed cutters for a landing operation somewhere up the Danube river in Austria.

But, for all the speed of the landing operation cutters, they didn't get there in time: Germany had already capitulated and there was no one to attack.

Long ago I felt some regret at this point: eew! there was no time for my Dad to become a hero!
Now, on the contrary, I am glad that he never shot and killed anyone, not even accidentally.

Then he was charged with guarding of the Serpent Island off the coast of Bulgaria, or maybe Romania, from where they transferred him to a minesweeper, a small Naval trawler with a small crew.

My Dad's seafaring service began with the passage from Sevastopol to Novorossiysk over the ruff Black Sea; it was not really a storm but the sea was pretty choppy.
Riding a swing in the park is fun but try enjoying it for a couple of hours and your stomach will throw up anything stuck in it from the day before yesterday's breakfast.
That sea crossing continued much longer.

When the Red Navy man Ogoltsoff came ashore at the destination port even the land itself kept swaying under his feet.
He tried to puke between the tall stacks of timber lined along the pier but to no avail.
The young sailor sat down just where he stood and, watching the towering rows of timber that kept swaying up and down, he thought that he would die in that naval service.

As you may figure out that was a wrong assumption because he had not yet met your grandmother, nor persuaded her to go with him to ZAGS.
And your grandmother hadn't yet born three children without becoming later a single mother (which is the first such occasion in the current story).

So, the sea sickness did not kill my father.
He learned to endure the pitching and tossing.
He tattooed a blue anchor on the back of his hand and on his right arm—from the elbow to the wrist—a swift outline of a swallow in the flight with a letter envelope in his beak (‘fly with greetings...') and he furrowed on his bitty minesweeper the vastness of the Black Sea clearing it from the minefields, which is what the Navy minesweepers are, actually, used for.

The main difference of submarine mines from landmines is that the first must be tied down or else they would float away and destroy any ship they meet without checking whether she was ‘theirs' or ‘ours'.
That's why each of the sea mines is tied with a steel cable to an anchor.
Anchors grab at the seabed and mines—the iron balls filled with air and explosives—pop up, without reaching the surface though but only as far as the cables' length let them rise according to the depths on specific sea routes.
And there the submarine mines hover, some two or three meters deep, waiting for a passing ship to catch one of the spike-like detonators sticking out of the mine shell in different directions as on a kid's sketch of the sun.

Thanks to its shallow immersion, the Navy minesweeper passes over the minefield without touching the spikes of the detonators.
The boat drags a long loop of a thick steel cable in its wake trailing over the seabed to cut the mines anchorage.
Then the freed mines float up to the sea surface for the liquidation.

To perform the liquidation a manned rowboat leaves the minesweeper towards the mine. 
The task is to fix a dynamite cartridge with the Bickford fuse to the huge iron ball of the mine.
(And this is not in a quiet park pond but among unsteady waves in the open sea with the mine-shell ball rising above the rowboat and then falling under it, striving to ram with a horn of the detonator.)
The operation is done by the boatswain in the rear seat, with a lit cigarette between his lips.
It's not for showing off what a daredevil he is. The cigarette is a readied tool to ignite the fuse.
Now it's set on fire and – Hup! Hup! Ho!
Everybody pulls with might and main, no shirkers in the boat. 
The goal is to get as far as possible while the fuse is hissing behind because the powerful charge of a submarine mine is designed to tear up the hulls of line battleships…

When decomposed into fractional details, romantic heroism disappears and the mine clearance of the sea begins to look like a tractor working in a kolkhoz field.
Get to the assigned water area and then furrow it all day long, back and forth, with the cable released behind the stern; and the following day – the next area.

On the whole, the minesweeper crew's heroism is in being a good team, and the fact that my father was not killed is their mutual merit.

For example, once in the end of the working day, Nikolai Ogoltsoff watched over the stern winch reeling back the trailing cable and noticed a mine being pulled along by the cable – its anchorage link had been intertwined with the minesweeper's cable.
It was too late to switch the winch off – it would turn on by inertia for some time enough to pull the mine in.

Dad's shirt stood off from his body like a beast's hide in a moment of extreme danger and he yelled, ‘Full Ahead!', in so an animal voice that the Captain on the bridge with lightning speed duplicated his order on E. O. T. sending the bell to the engine room, the mechanic, Dad's shift-man, did his job quickly – the boat propeller churned up the wave whose pressure cut off the thin cable of the doting mine.
So the team saved each other.

Five years later there remained no unswept areas in the sea routes and my father was transferred from the minesweeper to a coastguard ship, again as a mechanic of the diesel engine, he was good at this job.
The following year saw the end of his second term in the Navy service and they offered my father a job in a ‘mailbox'.

At that time there were many secret institutions, secret factories, and even secret cities in the USSR and, in order to fool the enemy spies as to whereabouts of all those secret objects, they had no postal addresses.
The addressee lived in no region, district, city, and street; he was referred in a much shorter way – ‘Mail Box № xxx, N. Ogoltsoff.'

Since on his last leave before the demobilization, the Red Navy man Ogoltsoff N. M. registered his marriage with the citizen Vakimova G. J. she also went to the ‘mailbox' in the Carpathian mountains.

There was no maternity hospital in the ‘box' and for giving me birth my mother had to go to the town of Nadveerna, thirty kilometers from the regional center, the city of Stanislavl (later renamed into Ivano-Frankovsk).
She was very afraid of going because of the Bandera men were shooting at the vehicles on the roads.

(...more than half of my life I considered the Bandera men bloody bandits and the Nazi's accomplices.
Isn't it so if a full-scale division named ‘Galichina' and manned with Western Ukrainians fought against the Red Army?

Then, gradually, it dawned on me that two years before the German invasion it was the Red Army to occupy Western Ukraine and assist the Soviet secret police, aka NKVD, to shoot and deport potential opponents of the Soviet system.

And what is a division when compared to an army?

Among the German Wehrmacht's comrades-in-arms, there also was the Russian Liberation Army fighting against the USSR.

And the last but not least, the rank-and-file Red Army men, participants in the events of that period, told me that the Bandera men fought fiercely against both Soviet and German troops.
They were Carpathian guerrillas, defending their land against successive liberators, aka enslavers.

But for my parents, all their life long, the Bandera men remained bandits…)

And two years later, when my mother again had to go to the hospital, the machine-guns still rumbled on the slopes of the Carpathian Mountains, but she could not hear them anymore, because her husband was transferred from one "mailbox" to another, from the Transcarpathia to the Valdai Upland.

The change in circumstances of their lives was caused by a secret denunciation sent to the Special Division of the previous "mailbox" by the neighbors in the house, where Galina Vakimova lived until her marriage.

The house (in Konotop parlance 'hutta') of 12 by 12 meters was a divided property.
Half of it belonged to citizen Ignat Pilluta.
The other half was divided between citizen Katerina Vakimova and citizen Duzenko; each of them possessed a wooden entrance hall, a kitchen, and a room.
The daughter of citizen Duzenko married citizen Starikov who moved to her father's part of the hutta.
One kitchen and one room were not enough for accommodating the young family and their parents-in-law.
In order to increase their living space, Duzenko and Starikov learned the number of the mailbox whereto the demobilized Mariner took their former neighbor and wrote to the Special Department of the ‘box'.

They informed the SD, whose duty was catching of the spies, that the father of Galina Vakimova (presently Ogoltsova) was arrested by NKVD before the war but somehow managed to return to Ukraine five years later.
During the occupation, there were a German headquarters in his house.
(Which is partly true – a Wehrmacht company headquarters was stationed in a half of the Pilluta's half.)
With the approach of the Soviet Army, Joseph Vakimov fled along with the retreating fascists.

The informers knew that Special Departments of ‘mailboxes' were especially vigilant and tenacious and the relatives of Joseph who disappeared in so anti-Soviet way would be arrested and, at least, deported.

They forgot to include the time factor in their calculations.
At that moment the Great Leader of Peoples, comrade Stalin, had passed to a better world. 
The nuts tightened to utmost under his rule were starting to slacken gradually.

Of course, Nikolai Ogoltsoff was repeatedly interrogated in the Special Department of the ‘mailbox'.
There took place an exchange of official correspondence between the Special Department and the Department of Interior Affairs of the city of Konotop.
However, my father was not repressed because of his absolute peasant origin and also the fact that diesel engines generating electricity for ‘mailboxes' obeyed him so willingly.

Still and yet, the ‘signal' could not be left without reaction and, to be on the safe side, they transferred my father to another ‘mailbox' farther away from the border with foreign countries.

The second lying-in of Galina Ogoltsova also occurred outside the ‘box'' – in the nearest district center.

(... it seems that the maternity hospital, or rather, its absence was the Achilles' heel of the then "mailboxes"…)

At first, they did not want to let her in the lying-in hospital because of taking her for a gypsy on account of her black hair and the red dressing gown with big imprinted flowers.
Escorting her husband Kolya contested the error and she was accepted.

An hour and a half later he was told that his wife had born a girl and five minutes later they informed him about one more birth – a boy.
And he exclaimed in answer, ‘Put out the light in the room! They go to the light!'

History, be it of just one person, or of a developed nation, boils down into two parts: the first is the history immemorial, preserved in legends, myths, and traditions; and the latter is the one that has been registered and logged and is linked to a certain calendar; this part of history is preserved in public chronicles, or in personal memory, if it is a story of one individual.

All the children of my parents were fascinated when Mom and Dad were retelling them the family legends about the activities and adventures of the listeners at the times that were beyond their infant memories.

For instance, that the first-born started his toddling at the railway station when they were leaving from the Carpathians for Valdai.
At the subsequent train stops my father took me out onto the stations' platforms to consolidate my skills in feeble walking because the wobbly floor of the rolling car did not allow for such a possibility.

At the new place, the family was allocated a wooden house from which I went for independent walks in the yard surrounded by a fence of pine planks.
My mother was greatly perplexed at my returns from the yard as dirty as a piglet.
Where could I possibly find such dirt in the small clean yard?

Changing my dress once again, she asked my father to follow me and find out the reason.
And he saw as our Sehryozha walked straight in the yard corner, pushed aside a fence plank hanging on just one nail and – off he went!
There was a hillock of sand dumped in the street for the construction of another house.
The boy climbed onto it, lay down on his belly and slid along the slope of sand wet after the rains.
And all that laughing happily!
Could you manage washing for such a villain?

While my mother was changing my dress once again, my father took a hammer, went out and nailed the dangling plank.
He came back and together with my mother watched – now what?

The child went out into the yard, went to the usual place and pulled the plank.
It didn't stir. 
Neither did the planks on both sides of it.
The boy went along the fence, twice, trying each of the planks then stopped and burst into tears…

My memory held neither the house nor its yard but at this point of the legend narrated by the parents, I had to suppress the sympathetic tears welling up in my eyes. 
Poor boy!

And from another legend, the soft paw of horror bristled up my hair and squeezed with its piercing talons the back of my neck, when my mother suddenly grew anxious that I had not been seen or heard for a long time already and she sent my father to look for me.
He went into the yard then into the street – not a sight of me anywhere.
No one from the neighbors had seen me and it was already getting dark.
He walked the street again from one end to the other and then he heard the rumbling noise of the river.
He hurried to the steep almost vertical slope under which the river, swollen after the recent rains, rolled angrily on.
And there, far down, he made out his son.
Run, Daddy, run!
The torrent of muddy water had engulfed the narrow strip of the bank under the cliff-like drop-off.
He had to race knee-deep in the water.

The boy clenched to the wall of clay holding on a tuft of withered grass in his pinch and with his feet in the water.
He did not even cry already and only whimpered, ‘uhu-uhu..'

Dad wrapped him in his jacket and could hardly find a spot to climb out without helping himself with his hands.

And how proudly fluttered the wings of my nose from the story that it was me who gave names to my brother and sister!

Since I was named after my father's brother, the names of my mother's siblings were readied for the twins who came next.
In the maternity hospital, they were addressed just so – Vadik and Lyudochka.

However, when the twins were brought home and the parents asked me what we would call them I immediately replied:
‘Sassa - Tattassa.'
And no fast-talk could convince me to change my mind.

That's why my brother's name became 'Alexander' and my sister was called 'Natalia'.

.

