~~~The Childhood~~~

The first notch in my memory, the end of my legendary history and the start line of the life race is a recollection of a bright sunny morning where my Mom is taking me to the kindergarten.
We stop waiting for a crowd of people in black to pass by.
They shout cheerful greetings to me. 
I hold my Mom by the hand and squint in the bright sun and I am well-pleased that so many grown-up zeks (convicts) know me by name. 
I never realized then that zeks' amiable attention was caused by the presence of such a young and beautiful mother… 

The zeks were building two blocks of stone houses on the hill named the Gorka and when the first block was completed our large family was allotted a two-room apartment on the upper floor in a house of eight apartments. 
The Block comprised six two-story houses along the perimeter of a vast rectangular courtyard.
 
The entrances to all of the six houses faced the courtyard. 
The four cranked corner buildings had three entrances each while the two shorter houses put in the middle of the rectangular long sides – had only one.
The road of hard concrete running around the Block separated it from its twin block under construction by the zeks which mirrored ours in all the details.

When let out to play in the courtyard, I often crossed the road and went to the building site.
The zeks did not shoo me off and at their midday breaks, they shared with me their ‘balanda' soup. 

From the newly acquired expressions that started to embellish my speech my parents quickly figured out my current circle of communication and hurriedly entered me to the kindergarten.

When the second block on the Gorka was completed the zeks disappeared altogether and all the subsequent construction works at the Object (inside that ‘mailbox' they commonly used this name for it) was performed by the soldiers with black shoulder straps in their uniform – ‘blackstrappers'. 
Beside them, there also were ‘redstrapper' soldiers at the Object but as for their mission there I am not aware of till now. 

The Gorka, the highest part of the Object, shared its name with the two blocks built atop of it.
Across the concrete strip of the road around the Gorka blocks there grew the forest, on all the four. 

The way to the kindergarten began right behind our house. 
There was a straight long tilt towards the gate in the fence of the recruit depot barracks. 
Yet before reaching it, a wide path branched to the right into the pine forest. 
It bypassed the fenced barracks and a large black pond under big trees and went down through the thicket of young fir trees. 
The descent ended at the fence of planks midst the forest and in a wide clearing there stood a two-story house among the mesh of narrow paths and playgrounds with sandboxes and small teremok-huts made of wood.
There even stood a real nosy bus. 
It had no wheels to make it easy to step inside from the ground but the steering wheel and the seats were in place.

On the first floor, you had to take off your coat and shoes, leave them in your tall narrow locker with the picture of two cherries on the door and after changing into slippers you might climb the stairs to the second floor with big rooms for separate groups and the even bigger common dining room. 

My kindergarten life was made up of different feelings and sensations.

The feeling of victory on the day when the parents were already taking home their children and I, in response to my Mom’s prompting, discovered that I could tie my shoelaces with no help from anyone.

The bitterness of defeat on that morning when the same shoelaces turned to be pulled tight into wet intractable knots and my Mom had to untangle them distressed that she would be late for her work. 

In the kindergarten, you never know what awaits you there before Mom, or Dad or a neighbor will take you home. 
They can put a glistening tube on a thin rubber hose deep into your nostril and blow in a nasty tasting powder, or else make you drink a whole tablespoon of pesky fish oil. 
‘Come on! Do you know how good it is for health?!.’

The most horrible thing when they announce that it is the injection day today.
The children line up toward the table with a loud clinking iron box on it from where the nurse takes out the replaceable needles for her syringe.
The closer to the table the tighter you are squeezed with horror.
You envy the lucky ones for whom the procedure is already over and they go away from the table pressing a piece of cotton wool to their forearm happily boasting it has given no pain.
Not at all.
The children in the line whisper how good it is that today’s injection is not done under the shoulder blade. 
That’s the most fearful one.

Saturdays are the best.
In addition to usual dinner of hateful bean soup, they give you half a glass of sour cream sprinkled with sugar. 
And they do not send the children to the bed for a “quiet hour”.
Instead, they curtain the dining room windows with hanging dark blankets and they show filmstrips on the wall with white inscriptions under each picture. 
The caretaker reads the lines of the inscription and asks if everyone has reviewed everything in the picture before dragging in the next frame in the film where the seaman Zhelezniak will capture the armored train of the Whites, or a rusty nail will become a brand new one after passing a steel making furnace – depending on what filmstrip was fed into the projector.

I really enjoyed those Saturday sessions: the darkened room: thin rays of light from the slits in the tin side of the projector: the voice sounding from the darkness.
All that had a touch of some mystery.

Maybe, I rather liked the kindergarten than not, although at times I ran into hidden reefs. 

One day my Dad repaired an alarm clock at home and handing it back to my Mom he said,
‘Here you are – you owe me a bottle now.’
For some reason, I got delighted with those words and bragged about them in front of children in my kindergarten group and at the end of the day, the caretaker informed my Mom about that. 
On our way home my Mom said it's a shame and a boy should not share every family happening outside the home.  
Now, they might think that my Dad is an alcoholic. 
Was it what I wished? Eh? Is that so very nice? 
How I hated myself at that moment!

And it was in the kindergarten that I fell in love for the first time in my life.
However, I did my best to suppress the feeling.
With bitterness and sadness, I understood the impossibility of such a love because there was the insurmountable—like a bottomless abyss—difference in age between me and the swarthy girl with cherry-like eyes. 
She was two years younger.

And how unreachable and adult looked the former kindergarten children that visited it someday after the lessons in their first grade at school.
Giving airs themselves, in festive white aprons, they answered the eager questions of our group caretaker in such a reserved and dignified manner!

The caretakers and other workers at the kindergarten wore medical white coats but not all.
One day one of them sat me on a bench next to her to soothe my grief.
I do not remember what was that: a fresh scratch on my knee or a new bump on my forehead, but that her name was Zeena, that’s for certain.
A gentle palm stroked my head and I forgot to cry pressing my cheek and temple to her left breast. 
I closed my eyes in the warm sun and listened to the thuds of her heart under the green dress with the smell of summer until there came a call from the building,
‘Zeena!’

And at home, we had a grandmother now who came from Ryazan because my Mom started to go to work and there should be someone to look after Sasha and Natasha. 
Grandma Martha wore a cotton blouse over a straight skirt to the floor and a white blue dotted kerchief on her head.
She folded it into a big triangle and tied two of its corners under her round chin.

My Mom worked three shifts, she was a Watcher at the Pumping Station.
Dad had as many shifts at the Diesel Station. 
I did not know where it was but it should be somewhere in the forest because one day Dad brought a piece of bread wrapped in a newspaper and the snack had been given to him by a bunny!

‘I’m coming back home after the shift and here’s a bunny under a tree who says to me, ‘Here, take it to Sehryoza and Sasha, and Natasha.’
The bread from the bunny was much more delicious than the bread sliced by Mom for the dinner.

At times the working shifts of the parents did not coincide: one of them was at home, the other at work.

Once my Dad brought me to my Mom’s  workplace – a squat brick building with a dark green door behind which, just opposite the entrance, there was a small room with a small window up above a big old desk and two chairs.
But if you did not enter that room and turned to the left, you got into the incessant rumble of the murky hall with another desk at which Mom was sitting when at work.

She didn’t expect us and was surprised so very much.
Then she showed me the log where she had to write down the time and the figures from the round manometers to which there led narrow bridges of iron sheets all with handrails because under them there was dark water for the pumps to pump.
That was where that terrible noise came from.
To talk there we had to shout but not all the answers were heard.
‘What? What?’
So we returned to the room by the entrance.

Mom gave me a pencil and some old spare log from a drawer in the desk to do some hither-thither drawings.
Soon she asked me if I wanted to go to play in the yard.
I did not want to go out but Dad said if I didn't listen to Mom then he'd never-never bring me there anymore and I went out. 

The yard was just a piece of a pebble road grown over with the grass from the gate to the log shed a short way from the Pumping Station corner. 
And behind the Station building there rose a steep all in nettles. 

I returned to the green door from which a short concrete path led to a small white hut without any window and a padlock on its iron door. 
How to play in such a place?

Two rounded knolls stood on either side of the hut and were twice as tall as that.
Grasping long tufts of grass, I climbed the right one.

From that height, the roof of the hut and the roof of the Pumping Station became quite observable and in the opposite direction beyond the fence under the knoll there stretched a strip of bush and ran a bright river but I would certainly be punished if I went out of the gate. 
For doing anything at all there remained only the other knoll with a thin tree on its top.
I went down to the hut, bypassed it from behind and climbed up to the second knoll.

From up there, everything turned out to be the same as from the previous knoll, only that there you could touch the tree. 
Hot and sweaty after the climbing I lay down under it.

What’s that?!.
Something stung me in the thigh and then in the other; again and again.
I turned around and peered over my shoulder behind my back.
A swarm of red ants was busily bustling about my legs below the shorts of yellow corduroy. 
I smacked them away but the burning, unmerciful pain kept increasing.

Mom jumped out from behind the green door to my wailing and Dad after her too.
He ran up to me and carried me down on his hands.
The ants were brushed off, but the swollen, reddened thighs still burned unbearably.

And I learned that lesson for the rest of my life – the best remedy for the bites of those red beasts is to sit in the cool hem of a silk dress tightly stretched between your Mom's knees. 

The grandma Martha lived in the same room with us, her three grandchildren, where a narrow iron bed was placed for her.
The twins were laid to sleep on the sofa – a cumbersome structure with hinged cylinder armrests at its ends and a high leatherette back in a wooden frame.
Along the top of the back there ran a narrow shelf and above it, a long low mirror inserted in the board of the frame to reflect the small figurines of white elephants arranged along the shelf in a file, from the biggest one to the smallest. 

The elephants had long been lost and the shelf was empty and only when we played the train, having built it on the floor of stools put upside down and chairs on their backs, then, with the nightfall in the train car, I climbed onto the shelf although it's so narrow that allowed only to lie on your side. 

It’s more interesting to play the train when the neighbors' children – Lida and Yura Zimins crossed the landing and joined us in our room.
The train became even longer and we,  sitting in the turned over stool-cars, swung them with all might and main and they were tap-tapping on the floor and grandma Martha began to grumble at our raging like zealots. 

When the games and supper were over, my aluminum folding bed was set up in the middle of the room. 
Mom brought and unfolded the mattress on it and a blue oilcloth too under the sheet, in case I pee in sleep, a huge pillow and a warm blanket filled with cotton wool to make my bed. 

Grandma Martha turned off the radio box hanging on the wall by the door and switched off the light.
However, the darkness in the room was quite relative – the lights from the windows in the neighboring corner building and from the lampposts in the courtyard penetrated the mesh of tulle window curtains and under the door, there came a sliver of light from the corridor between the kitchen and the parents' bedroom. 
I watched the silhouette of grandma Martha as she stood by her bed and whispered something into the upper right corner of the room. 
Mom had explained to me that grandma Martha was praying to God that way but the parents could not allow her to hang an icon in that corner because Dad was a Party member. 

The hardest problem in the morning was finding the stockings.

Believe it or not, yet in those days even boys wore stockings.
A special belt with a pair of buttons in front was put on top of the underpants. 
Short rubber bands with fasteners on their ends were buttoned to the belt.
The fastener was a rubber button in a tight wire frame. 
The upper edge of the stocking was pulled over the rubber button and squeezed into the wire frame. Ugh!. 
And all that harness, of course, was put on me by Mom yet finding the stockings was my responsibility, and they always found some new place to hide. 

Mom keeps urging to come to the kitchen for breakfast; you, slow duck, be quick-quick; after all, she should be in time for her work.
But those meanies are nowhere to be seen. 
At last, I trace the nose of one of them sticking from under the hinged armrest of the sofa where the twins are still sleeping.
I need Mom's help to get them out without awakening Sasha. 

Tired of Mom's every morning tongue-lashing, I found an elegant solution to the problem of disappearing stockings and tied them to my ankles—one for each—after the light in the room was already switched off but the grandma Martha still talked in a whisper to her God. 
My brother and sister with their pillows on the opposite armrests of the sofa were as always kicking each other under their mutual blanket and did not notice anything in the dark.
I was in time to cover my legs with my blanket when Mom entered our room to kiss her children goodnight. 

And suddenly she did something she had never done before. 
Mom switched on the light living in the bulb inside the orange silk shade with hanging fringe of threads under the ceiling and threw the blanket off my legs discovering the stocking shackles around them.
‘Something had just pushed me to do it’, she told later to Dad with a laugh.
I had to untie the stockings and leave them on the bundle of my other clothes on the chair next to my folding bed notwithstanding all the cleverness and practical worth of my idea…

Perhaps, the most unpleasant part of the kindergarten life was the "quiet hour" – when you should go to your bed after the midday meal. 
Now, go and take off your clothes and put them on a small white stool and no matter how carefully you do it at getting up after the "quiet hour" the clothes will be in some kind of a mess or a stocking fastener will refuse to work.
And what’s the use of forced lying for a whole hour staring at the white ceiling or at the white window curtains or along the long row of cots with a narrow passage after each pair of them?

The children would lie silently in that row ending at the far white wall by which the caretaker sits with her book.
Occasionally some child would approach her asking in a whisper for the permission to go out to the toilet.
And she would in a whisper let him or her go and then in a hushed voice suppress the rustle of the whispering arisen along the cots rows:
‘Well, everybody shut your eyes and sleep!'

Probably, at times I really fell asleep during that "quiet hour", though more often I just froze in a numb drowsiness with my eyes open but not distinguishing the white ceiling from the white sheet drawn over my head. 

And suddenly the drowsiness was shaken off by a gentle touch of cautious fingers crawling from my knee over my thigh. 
I looked out from under the sheet.
Irochka Likhachova lay on the next cot with her eyes closed tightly but in between our sheets I made out a length of her outstretched arm.
Her fingers dived into my underpants and enclosed my flesh in a warm hand.
It was inexpressibly pleasant.
A little later her hand left my private parts – why? yet more!

Her hand found mine and pulled it under her sheet to put on something soft and yielding that had no name and that was not necessary at all and all I needed was that all that went on and on. 
But when I, tightly squinting, brought her hand back, under my sheet, it stayed there only briefly and again pulled mine over to under hers.

The caretaker announced the end of the 'quiet hour' and called to get up everybody.
The room filled with the hubbub of dressing children.

‘And we don't forget to make our beds', the caretaker kept repeating didactically walking to and fro when Irochka Likhachova suddenly shouted: 
‘And Ogoltsoff got into my panties!’
The children hushed expectantly. 
Sledgehammered with the disgraceful truth, I felt a hot wave of shame rolling up in me to splash out of my eyes with tears.
‘It's you who did it! Fool!' roared I and ran out of the room to the second-floor landing tiled with alternating squares of yellow and brown. 

I decided to never ever any more return to that group and that kindergarten.
No, never ever anymore. 
Enough is enough. 

But I didn't have time to think about how I would live further because I was distracted by the red fire extinguisher on the wall. 
Actually, it was not the fire extinguisher that caught my attention but the yellow square with a picture on its side where a man in a cap held exactly the same fire extinguisher, only upside down, directing an expanding gush from it to a fat bush of flames.
The picture, probably, served a kind of visual instruction for the right use of the fire extinguisher and the one in the man's hands was painted completely true to life, even the yellow square with the picture instruction was in place containing a little man in a tiny cap who fought, standing upside down, the fire with the spurt from his miniature fire extinguisher. 

And then it dawned on me that in the already unmake-outable picture on that miniature extinguisher the already indistinguishable man is back to the normal position – feet down.
But again, the next one, in the next picture, will be turned and—the most breathtaking discovery!—these diminishing men just could not end, they would only grow smaller to become unimaginably tiny specks and further beyond it without ever ending simply because this Fire Extinguisher hanged there on the wall of the staircase landing of the second floor, next to the white door to the senior group, opposite the hallway to the toilet.

And then I was awakened from the spell by being called to immediately go to the dining room where the kindergarten groups already were seated for the after quiet-hour tea.
Yet, ever since I was passing under the Fire Extinguisher–the bearer of innumerable worlds–with respectful understanding.

As to getting into someone else’s panties, that was my only and unique experience.
Enlightened by it, when in some “quiet hour” I had, with the undertone permission of the caretaker, to go out to pee, then I, passing along, knew the meaning of sheets overlapping the gap between two coupled cots and why so firmly Khromov closed his eyes laying next to Solntseva.

We lived on the second floor and the next to ours was the door of Morozovs, a couple of pensioners in the apartment of three rooms.
Opposite them, across the landing, there also was a three-room apartment where, beside the Zimins family, in one of the rooms lived single women, replacing each other, and sometimes couples of related women.
Between the Morozovs’ to the Zimins’ doors there stretched a dead wall with a vertical iron ladder fixed to it which led through the open hatchway to the attic under the slate roof, where the tenants were hanging their laundry and the father in the Savkins family—opposite our door—kept pigeons after changing into the blue sportswear.

From the door of the Savkins towards ours ran a wooden handrail supported by the iron uprights. 
It didn't cross the landing but turned down along the steps of the staircase of two flights to the first-floor landing and from there—four more steps down—to the entryway vestibule. 
The wide entrance door kept closed by means of a big iron spring opened to the vastness of the Block’s courtyard.
And the narrow door opposite it hid the steep steps into impenetrable darkness of the underground basement.

Founding on my subsequent life experience I may safely assume that we lived in Flat 5 though at that time I didn’t know it yet.
All I knew was that behind our door with a large homemade mailbox there would open the entrance hall with the narrow hallway closet  door to the left, and the glazed door to the parents’ room to the right where instead of a window there was the wide balcony door, also glazed in its upper part, facing the huge courtyard.

A long corridor led from the hall directly to the kitchen, past the blind doors to the bathroom and the toilet on the right, and in the left wall of the corridor, before reaching the kitchen, there was the door to the children’s room.
It had two windows, the left looked into the courtyard and the right presented the view of the wall and windows of the next house—the corner one.

The only window in the kitchen was also looking at the same neighboring building and in the kitchen wall to the right from the door, there was another window frame up under the ceiling, the small matte glass of the toilet window dark, of course, unless the light inside was on.

In the bathroom and in the hallway closet there were no windows but there were electric bulbs – just click the switch outside and walk safely in.

On entering the toilet, I, first of all, spat on the wall next to the throne and only then sat down to go potty and watch the spittle crawling slowly down the green coat of paint and marking its progress with a vertical track of moisture. 
If there was not enough saliva in the glob to reach the baseboard I would come to the rescue by additional spitting on the path – just above the stuck locomotive.
Sometimes the trip took from three to four spits and sometimes just one was quite enough.

The parents were perplexed with the spittle on the toilet walls until the day when Dad entered immediately after me and during the strict interrogation that followed I confessed that it’s me who was doing that, although I could not explain why.
After that, in fear of a punishment, I blotted the traces of the wrong-doing with the pieces of a cut-up newspaper from the cloth bag on the opposite wall but the thrill was gone. 

(… my son Ashot at the age of five sometimes leaked past the john – on the toilet wall.
More than once I explained to him that doing so was wrong and bad and they who missed should wipe up after themselves.
One day he balked and refused to wipe the paddle.
Then I grabbed him by the ear and led to the bathroom and ordered to pick up the floor cloth, led him back to the toilet and ordered in a rage choked voice to collect all the urine from the floor with that cloth.
He obeyed.
Of course, in more civilized countries a court decision might have deprived me of the parental rights for such a child abuse, however, in my opinion, I was right in that particular case.
No biological species is able to survive in their own waste.
I would understand him had he been spitting on the wall but in the toilet of the house that I built the walls were whitewashed and saliva wouldn’t crawl down the wall whitewashed with lime.
Later, the money for ceramic wall tiles was scraped up but the children had already become adults…)

You feel yourself kind of omnipotent when reconstructing the world of half a century ago—adjusting the details to your liking with no one to blame you in inconsistency.
However, you can’t fool yourself and I should admit that now—from a distance in fifty years—not everything is discernible with absolute accuracy.

For instance, I am far from certain that the pigeon enclosure in the attic was in some way connected with the officer Savkin.
It is quite possible that the structure belonged to Stepan Zimin, the father of Lida and Yura.
Or maybe there were two enclosures?
As a matter of fact, now I am not sure in the presence of pigeons in this or that enclosure on the day when I ventured to climb up the iron ladder towards something unknown, indistinguishable in the dusky square of the hatchway above my head.
It is possible that I just remembered the remark overheard in the conversation of my parents that Stepan's pigeons also suffered because of his booze binges. 

Only one thing remains undoubted – the tremulous ecstasy of discovery when, leaving behind my sister with her ominous predictions about my inescapable getting killed with the parental hand, and my brother watching my movements closely from the tiled landing far down there, I climbed into the new world unfolding before me under the slate roof.
A couple of days later Natasha came running into our room to proudly announce that Sasha had just climbed to the attic as well... 

So, it is quite possible that the pigeons in the attic were gone, but in the courtyard of the Block, there were lots of them. 

The courtyard itself was a rare masterpiece of a geometrically regulated layout.
Inside the big rectangular bounded by the six buildings, an ellipse of the road was inscribed with drenches on its both sides crossed with mighty, albeit short bridges opposite each of the fourteen entrances to the Block houses.
Two narrow concrete paths cut the ellipse into three parts at right angles to its longitudinal axis.
The resultant rectangular in between the paths and the road ditches was in its turn divided into three parts by an additional pair of concrete paths connecting the first two.
From the points of the four paths’ intersections the diagonal rays of four more concrete paths traversed the ellipse’s ends towards the central entrances in the corner buildings; and from that same intersection points came out the concrete arc paths described around two round wooden arbors turning the courtyard into a model of perfect geometricity surpassing in that line any Versailles-like designs.

(… Nature is unable to compete with such a purified Bau Stile.
There are no circular circles among natural ones; neither absolutely isosceles triangles, nor flawless squares – someplace somehow the evenness would be ruined by the stubborn awl spiking through the backpack of Mother Nature…)

There were no trees in the yard.
Maybe later they were planted but in my memory, I find not even a seedling but only the turf cut into geometric figures by the concrete paths and, of course, the pigeon flocks flying from one end of the huge courtyard to the other at the call, 
‘Gooil-gooil-gooil-gooil-gooil-gooil-gooil!’

I liked these looking all so alike and at the same time so different birds, flocking around you, banging bread crumbles from the road on which you’d never see a vehicle; except for a slow truck, once in a blue moon, with the furniture of moving in or out tenants, or with the load of firewood for Titan boilers installed in the bathrooms of the apartments.

But even more, I liked feeding pigeons on the tin ledge out the kitchen window. 
Although for that you had to have a long wait until some of the birds would get it where from you call your ‘gooil-gooil' invitation and with the swish of the air being cut by the flapping wings hover over the gray tin of the ledge with scattered breadcrumbs and land on it with its naked legs to start to tap quickly on the tin with the offering. 

The pigeons seemed to have an eye on each other or had some kind of intercom system because the first one was followed by others flying in in twos and threes and whole flocks, maybe even from the next block. 
They covered the window ledge with the chaos of almost two layers of feathered backs and heads ducking and picking the crumbs, pushing each other, fluttering off and squeezing in back again.
And taking advantage of that pandemonium, you could cautiously put your hand out through the small window leaf in the kitchen window and touch from above one of their moving backs but cautiously so that they wouldn't dash off with the loud flapping of the wings and fly away… 

Besides pigeons, I also liked the holidays, especially the New Year. 
The Christmas tree was set in the parents’ room in front of the white curtain screening the balcony door.
The plywood boxes from postal parcels received long ago and now full of fragile shiny adoration came from the hallway closet: all kinds of fruits, gnomes, bells, grandfathers frosts, baskets, drill-bit-like purple icicles, balls with inlaid snowflakes on their opposite sides and plain balls but also beautiful, stars framed within thin glass tubes, fluffy rain-garlands from golden foil.

In addition, together with Mom, we made garland-chains of paper.
We painted it with watercolors, and when the paper dried we cut it into strips and with the glue of watered flour prepared colored links for long paper-chains.

Lastly, after decorating the tree with toys and sweets—because a candy with a thread through its motley wrapper is a nice (and edible!) decoration—a snowdrift of white cotton wool was put under the tree and there stood a foot-high Father Christmas on his plywood stand in the red cloth coat with the big staff and tightly sewn up bag over his shoulder. 

Oh! How could I forget the multicolored twinkling of tiny bulbs on thin wires?!
They came into the Christmas tree before anything else and the wires were connected to the heavy electric transformer hidden under the snowdrift – Dad made it himself.

And he also made the mask of Bear for the matinee in the kindergarten.
Mom explained how it should be done and Dad brought some special clay from his work.
Then on a sheet of plywood, he modeled the bear’s face with a stuck-up nose.
When the clay dried up, Dad covered it with layers of gauze and small newspaper pieces soaked in the water.
After a day or two the muzzle dried up and hardened, the clay was thrown away and—wow!—there was the mask made of papier-mache. 
The mask was painted with the brown watercolor and my Mom made me a suit of brown satin trousers with a jacket attached to them and you could get into the trousers only through the jacket.
That’s why at the matinee I was much happier that the woodcutters with the cardboard axes over their shoulders.

(...and until now to me, the watercolors  smell of the New Year, or maybe vice verse – it’s hard to decide, I’m not too good at moot points…)
