
I do not know why but at that tender age I was quite sure that I would do something after which they would write books about me.
However, my cheeks burned with shame at the thought that the future writers about my childhood would have to admit – even being a school first-grader I sometimes wetted the bed at night, although Dad just couldn't hold back his exasperation because at my age he no longer peed in the bed. Never! 
Or that terrible occurrence when on the way from school my stomach tightened unbearably and I barely get home to the toilet room, but there everything stopped halfway, no matter how hard I tried to force it out, until Grandma terrified with my howling rushed from the kitchen to the toilet and snatching a piece of newspaper from the bag on the wall ripped the stuck turd.
Who could write such things in a book?!..

(...already in another—my present—life my current wife Satenic went to a fortune teller in the half-destroyed city of Shushi when our son Ashot fled the local army because of harassment from his company commander and regular beatings at the guardhouse.

In the year of Ashot's birth, the USSR was ripping apart at all seams; it seemed that a new life would begin and I cherished a hope that before he grew of age there would be no drafts – just contract enlistment to the army. 
Why not? ‘You never know the Devils’ next joke’, as the Russian saying runs.
Well, in my dream's case, the sonofabitch was not in the mood for joking. 

The commander of the company, nicknamed Chana, picked on Ashot because of his own dissatisfaction with the unfair arrangement of life – the Karabakh war combat friends of his had already become generals while he, Chana, was still rotting at the front line. 

Ashot was missing for eight days and at that point, Satenic went to Shushi and the fortune teller assured her that everything would be alright. 
And so it happened.
Ashot came home, we took him back to the place of his service to higher ranked commanders and he was transferred to another regiment, in a hotter spot, where he served the remaining year but already without the sergeant insignia in his shoulder straps.

So, in the course of seeing the future, the fortune teller shared additional information as a bonus, probably, that my Grandma in the other world was worrying about me and a candle should be lit for her. 
My Grandma's name (so the fortune teller) was almost like that of Maria, but slightly different. 

I was flabbergasted by the accuracy of the extrasensory guess. 
Maria and Martha are indeed very similar names of the two sisters from the Gospel.
Leo Taxil says that even Jesus himself sometimes confused them.

When my Grandma became ninety-eight, she also started to forget her own name. 
On such days she turned to her daughter for help:
‘Lyaksandra, I’m wondering lately – what’s but my name?'
Well, Aunt Alexandra was also a good one: 
‘Oy, Mom! But I don’t remember it too! Maybe, Anyuta?’
‘No … Somehow different it was...’
And three days later she would announce to her daughter;
‘I remembered! Martha, I am. Martha!’

No wonder the fortune teller couldn't give out the exact name. 

However, by this flashforward, I jumped ahead too much because it's me who had to serve in the army first but in this here letter to you, I'm still at the kindergarten senior group. 

I think I’d better turn off the tap with profound thoughts on infantile megalomania and return to the phase of the kindergarten completing formation of my personality…)

Now, back to the pivotal 1961.
What is remarkable about it (besides my graduating the senior group at the Object's kindergarten)? 
Well, firstly, no matter how you turn this figure around it will still be “1961”.
In addition, in April the radio on the wall of our room with the bell-like voice of Levitan announced that in an hour there would be an important government declaration.
Grandma started sighing and stealthily crossing herself.
Yet, when at the appointed time the whole family gathered in the children’s room, Levitan gleefully announced the first manned spaceflight by our countryman Yuri Gagarin who in 108 minutes flew about the globe and opened a new era in the history of mankind.

In Moscow and other large cities of the Soviet Union, people went to an unplanned demonstration directly from their workplaces in robes and overalls with handmade placards: 
‘We are the first! Hooray!' 
And at the Object in our children’s room under cheerful marches from the radio on the wall my Dad impatiently explained to Mom and Grandma:
‘Well, and what’s there not clear? They put him on a rocket and he flew around.’

Yuri Gagarin was being taken to Moscow by a special plane and on the way promoted from the lieutenant rank immediately to major.
So at the airport, he descended the airplane stairs with big stars in the shoulder straps of his light gray officer's greatcoat and marched with a precise parade step along the carpet runner from the plane to the government in raincoats and hats. 
The laces of his polished shoes got untied on the way and whipped the carpet runner at each step but he did not lose his demeanor and in general jubilation no one even noticed them.

(...many years later reviewing footage of a familiar newsreel, I suddenly noticed them and before that as, probably, all other viewers I could only see his face and the cool way he was marching in.
Did he notice?
I don’t know.
But all the same, he came very well and, holding his hand under the peak of his cap reported that the mission assigned by the Party and the Government had been fulfilled…) 

Standing under the wall radio at the Object, I had a too faint idea about flying around the globe sitting on a rocket, but if Dad said it’s so it had to be so.

A month or two later there was a monetary reform. 
Instead of being large and long pieces of paper, the money became much smaller, however, kopecks remained the same.
Adults often and loudly discussed the reform in the kitchen.
In an effort to join the world of grown-ups I once stood in the middle of the kitchen and proclaimed that new roubles were disgustingly yellow and Lenin in them did not look like Lenin at all but like some petty deuce. 

Dad threw a brief glance at the neighbors gathered in our kitchen and told me not to meddle in the conversation of the elders and to go to the children’s room.
I bore the offense silently. 
So, Grandma could say all that she wanted and I was not allowed?. 

At times I heard how my Mom praised me in her chit-chats with the neighbor women:
‘It happens, he asks questions that even I have no answers to!’
From those words, I felt proud tingling in my nose as after drinking some lemonade or fizzy water. 

(...may it be my megalomania took roots there?..)

But the setback in the new money discussion became a good lesson for me – no plagiarism from your grandmother, show off your own wits, if, of course, there are any.

And, by the by, about the nose.
In other people's homes, well, in the neighbors' apartments, for example, or separate houses, like that of Dad's friend Zatseppin, there always was some kind of a smell. 
Not necessarily unpleasant but it’s always there. 
And different to other places.
Only at our home, there was absolutely no smell whatsoever… 

In summer of that year, the adults took great interest in volleyball. 
After her work and home chores, my Mom put on her sportswear and went out to the volleyball grounds. 
It’s a stone’s throw away from our house, across the road, next to the Bugorok looking like a hill from Russian epic tales.

They played by the ‘knock out’ system and the teams were changing one another till the full night darkness condensed around the nearby lone bulb on the log post.
The players scolded each other for failures or hotly objected to the opposite team but they did not dare to argue with the umpire because he sat so high and had a whistle.

The on-lookers also changed.
They came and went, shouted along with the game, manned teams of their own, slapped themselves to kill a biting mosquito or paddled their buzzing scourges away with green broad-leaved branches.

And I was there and also fed the mosquitoes but they are a dim recollection yet I remember dearly a rare sense of community and belonging – it’s all us and we all were our own people.
It’s a pity that someone had to leave and go but there were others coming. 
Ours. We.

(...so long ago was all that. 
Before the TV and the Internet shoved us to separate cells…)

Closer to autumn Mom started to teach me reading the ABC book.
The book was full of pictures and the letters were strung with dashes designed to assist in forming the words. 
Yet the letters still wouldn't add up to something comprehensible. 
Sometimes I tried to cheat and, looking at the picture, read: 
‘Arr-hey-eye-enn. Rain!’
But Mom answered:
‘No cheating! It’s a ‘ c-l-o-u-d’.
I poohed and eeewed and had again to convert syllables into the words and in a few weeks, I could already sing through the texts at the end of the book where the harvester was reaping corn in the collective farm field… 

My Grandma was not in the least affected by the Yuri Gagarin’s statement for the journalists that while flying he saw no God up there.
She started a covert agitation and anti-atheistic propaganda among me.
She told me to mark well that God could do anything and knew everything and, most importantly, could do what you asked Him to.
And in exchange for what? 
For merely regular praying!
But then at school, I, with God's help, would have no problems. 
I wished a grade of ‘five' – I prayed for it – I got it. 
Some good trade, eh?
And I wavered. 
I succumbed to her agitation although I did not show it.
All the same, I became a believer.

However, no one ever taught me what a believer’s supposed to do. 
So I had to invent the rituals myself.
Going down to play in the courtyard, I dropped for a second behind the narrow basement door and there, in the darkness, said – not even in a whisper but in my mind: 
‘Alright, God, you know all yourself. See? I’m crossing me.’
And I put a sign of the cross somewhere about my navel.

However, when there remained just one week before school something balked in me and I became an apostate.
I renounced Him.
And I did it out loud. Openly.
I went into the field by the garbage bins enclosure and shouted at the top of my lungs:
‘There’s no god!’

There was nobody around—not a single soul—but I took proper precautions, just in case if someone would hear accidentally, say, from behind the fence surrounding the garbage bins.
‘Aha!' they would think, 'Now that boy shouts there is no god – a clear-cut proof that before he thought there was.' 
And that’s a shame for a boy who in a day or two would become a schoolboy.
Therefore instead of the clear syllables of the blasphemous renunciation, I shouted indistinct vowels: 
‘Ou ou ouu!’
Nothing happened.
Once again with my face up, I repeated the cry and then in a way of putting the final period in my relations with God, I spat in the sky.
Neither thunder nor lightning followed only I felt the spittle landing as drizzle droplets on my cheeks.
So it was not a period but ellipsis points. 
Who cares?
And I went home liberated…

(...the microscopic spittle fallout sprinkling, in the aftermath of the godless spit in the sky, the face of seven-year-old me, proved up to the hilt my inability to draw conclusions from personal experience: a handful of sand when thrown up invariably came back down.
It also showed my complete ignorance of Sir Isaac Newton's conclusions in his law of the like matters. 
In short, it was really the high time for the young atheist to plop into the inevitable flow of the compulsory school education…)

The endlessly long summer at last pitied the little ignoramus and passed me to September when, dressed in a bluish suit with shiny tin buttons, with the wisp of hair above my forehead trimmed in the real hair salon for men, where Mom took me to the day before, squeezing in my right hand the stalks of the newspaper wrapped dahlias bunch, brought the previous evening from the small front garden of Dad's friend Zatseppin who had a black motorcycle with a sidecar  – I went for the first time to the first grade escorted by my Mom. 
I cannot remember whether she was holding my hand or I insisted that I was big enough to carry both the flowers and the dark brown brief-bag. 

We walked down the same road as to the kindergarten on which for a long time had already not seen the black columns of zeks.
That morning it was walked by other than me first-graders with their parents and by the elder, differently aged schoolchildren, separately or in groups. 
But down the descent, we did not turn to the wide trail to the kindergarten and went straight to the wide-open gate of the aRecruit Depot Barracks. 
We crossed their yard and left it through the side gate and went along the path between the high trees of spruce and gray trunks of aspen up the hill.
From its top there again began a long descent through the deciduous forest, with a swamp on the right after which there was a short but steep climb to the road that entered the open gate of the school grounds behind the fence of planks.
Inside the closure, the road led to the concrete steps that rose to a narrow path in front of the entrance to the two-story school building, with rows of wide windows.

We did not enter the school and for some reason were standing for a long time and the big schoolchildren ran around and about and were yelled at.
Then we, the first-graders, were lined facing the school.
The parents remained behind but still there and we were standing with our flower bunches and brief-bags until they told us to form pairs and follow an elderly woman to the class.
And we awkwardly moved forward.
One girl burst into tears. 
They were comforting her and urging to walk on.

I looked back at my Mom.
She waved and smiled and said something I could hear no longer.
Black-haired, so young and beautiful…

At home, Mom told everyone that Seraphima Sergeevna Kasyanova was a very experienced teacher and it's very good I got to her class. 

Initially, the experienced teacher taught us to write in notebooks of ruled paper of horizontal and slanting lines. 
We were allowed to use only pencils.
We wrote endless lines of sticks and hooks from which later on to compose the letters with a nice slope if we kept to the slant.

It took an eternity before the teacher announced that we were to start writing with pens and should bring them next day to school together with unspillable ink-pots and replaceable nibs.

Those dip pens – graceful wooden pins in a bright monochrome color with cuffs of light tin on one end where the nib was inserted I had been bringing with me each day in a wooden pencil-box with the long sliding lid.
As for the plastic unspillable ink-pots, they really held the ink in between their double walls if accidentally overturned or deliberately put upside down. 
The pen’s nib was dipped in the ink-pot but not too deep because if you pick too much ink with the nib the ink would flow on the page – oops! – a splotch again…

One dip was enough for a couple of words and then – dip the nib again.
At school, there was only one ink-pot put on each desk for the pair of students sharing it to dip in turn their pen's nibs in. 

The tip of the replaceable nibs was bifurcated, however, the halves pressed tightly to each other were leaving a hair-thin line on the paper (if you didn’t forget to dip the pen’s nib into the ink-pot before).
And when you applied light pressure to the pen the nib’s halves smoothly parted leaving a wider line.
The alteration of thin and bold lines with the gradual transition from one to another imprinted in fine samples of the calligraphy textbook drove me into despair by their reachlessness.   

Later, already in the third grade, I mastered one more application of dip pen's nibs. 
If you stick the nib into the side of an apple, turn it over, and then pull it out the nib will hold a small cone of apple flesh and in the apple side, there is left a neat hole where you can insert the extracted cone after turning it the other way round. 
See? You’ve got an apple with a horn.
You may add more of such horns and the apple starts looking like a sea mine or a hedgehog – depending on the perseverance of the artisan.
Finally, you can eat your piece of art but I, personally, never liked the taste of the resultant apple mutant.

And with one more year at school, in the fourth grade, you learned the way of turning the dip pen's nib into a missile. 
First, break off one of the halves in the sharp end of the nib to turn it even sharper, then split the insertion end and jam a tiny paper tail-stabilizer in the crack to achieve a straight line flight.
Now, throw your dart into something wooden – the door, the blackboard, a window frame – the prickly nib’s half will pierce deep enough to stick out.

The road to school had become quite familiar but each time a little different.
Foliage fell, the droughts started blowing between the naked tree trunks and the school was peeping before you reach the descent by the swamp from near the big aspen with a wide trunk of the bright and smooth bark on which there stood an inscription cut out with a knife: 
‘It’s where the youtth is lost’.

(…until now the name of the youth literary magazine THE YOUTH seems to me too short in its spelling…)

Then the snow fell but a wide path to the school was trampled anew in the deep snowdrifts in the course of one day. 
The sun sparkled blindingly on both sides of that road to knowledge which turned into a snowy trench with orange marks of urine on its walls.
The next snowfall would completely bury them yet they popped up again in other places of the newly trampled and deeper trail through the forest.

Before the New Year, our class finished learning the primer and Seraphima Sergeevna brought us to the school library, a narrow room on the second floor. 
She said that from now on we might come there and borrow books for our personal reading at home.

I brought home my first book and fell on the sofa with it and stayed there, turning from a side to another, to my back, to my tummy, until it was read through.
It told a story about the city with its streets walked by the hammer-creatures who banged on heads of the small bell-creatures to make them ring.
Just so a story by Aksakov about a music-playing snuff-box...


Winter evenings are so hasty rides, you had barely had your meal and scribbled away your calligraphy home task when – look! – it’s already deep dusk outside the window.

Yet even the dark could not derail the social life and you put on your felt boots and warm pants on top of them, the winter coat and fur hat and – off you go to the Gorka! 

Is it far away? Not at all!
The Gorka was the name of not only the two blocks and the hill as a whole but also of that very tilt towards the Recruit Depot Barracks that we walked down on our way to school.
Being well-trodden the snow on the Gorka was ideal for riding a sled.
The descent started from the concrete road surrounding the blocks.
Its concrete, of course, was also covered with firm snow, but the lamplight from the posts along it confirmed – it’s still that same road.

One of those posts marked the top on the Gorka.
The cone of light from its lamp encircled the meeting place of the sled riding fans crowd.
Most of the sleds were store bought ones – with aluminum runners and motley seat beams.
Mine was made by Dad. 
It was shorter and made of steel and much speedier than the sleds from a store.

After a short run pushing the sled downwards with your hands on the backrest, you fall with your belly on it and fly downhill.
The bottom of the descent is drowning in the night darkness punctured by the distant light bulb over the gate of the Recruit Depot Barracks that jumps in time with the jerks of the sled under you.
The wind presses tears out of your eyes.

When the sled comes to a stop you collect the icy rope run through two holes in the sled’s nose and stomp up back.
The sled obediently runs after you pushing, now and then, the heels of your felt boots with its nose.
And with the approach of the roadside lamp, myriads of living sparks start to wink at you from the roadside snow-drifts changing their twinkle at each step. 
And on the top of the Gorka, they have already started to marshal a train of sleds hitching them to each other and – hup-ho! – off the general mass goes with the wild screams mixed with a frosty screech of the runners into the darkness. 

At some point I, maybe like thousands other boys—before me and after—did something that you shouldn’t do and we knew quite well that we shouldn’t, no,  but the sled’s nose in the light of the lamp shimmered with such a beautiful set of frosty sparks that we could not resist and licked it.
Sure thing, as expected, the tongue got stuck to the frost gripped metal and we had to rip it off back with the pain and shame and hope that no one noticed that such a big boy was so silly. 

Then you go home, dragging your sled along with stiff hands and throw it by the basement door in the entrance vestibule.
You come upstairs to the second floor and knock at your door with your felt boots and your Mom pulls off your mittens with a bead of ice on each hair of their wool disclosing the white icicles of your hands.
She runs out into the yard to scoop up a basin of snow and rubs your senseless hands with it and orders to keep them in the saucepan in the kitchen sink under the cold water running from the tap.
And life slowly begins to return to your hands.
You whine from the needles of piercing pain in the fingers and Mom yells at you:
‘Serves you right! You, rascal roamer! You, bitter woe of mine!’
And you whimper from unbearable pain in your stiff fingers and in your tongue skinned when tearing it off the frosty iron but you have no doubt anymore that everything will be fine because your Mom knows how to save you…

After the holidays Seraphime Sergeevna brought to the class an issue of The Pioneers’ Pravda newspaper and one whole lesson long read to us from it that Nikita Khrushchev had just made a promise that in twenty years the Communism would be built in our country.
When at home I joyfully announced that we were going to live in Communism where any item at the store would be free of charge, my parents exchanged glances but didn’t join my enthusiasm.
I no longer bothered them yet calculated in my mind that at the onset of Communism I’d be twenty-seven years of age, not too very old, so I’d have time to live in it.

By that time all the pupils of our class had already been admitted to Octoberists, with grown-up fifth-graders visiting us for the solemnity to pin an Octoberist badge on the school uniform to each of us.
It was a small scarlet star of five ends with a round frame in the center from where, as if from a medallion, looked out the angel-like face of Volodya Ulyanov in his early childhood when playing with his sister he commanded: 
‘March ahead from under the sofa!’
Then he grew up and became Vladimir Ilyich Lenin and they wrote lots of books about him… 

At home appeared a filmstrip projector – an awkward device with a set of lenses in its nose tube, and a box of small plastic barrels too, containing tight scrolls of dark filmstrips under their lids. 
Among the filmstrips, there was the old acquaintance about the hero of the Civil War, the seaman Zheleznyak, or about the little daughter of a revolutionary, who smartly hid the typesetting sorts brought by her father for printing underground leaflets into a jug of milk when the police raided their house.
They never thought of checking under the milk.

Sure enough, it was me who loaded the filmstrips and then rotated the black scroll wheel moving the projected frames. 
And I also read the inscriptions under the pictures but it was not for long because my sister and brother learned them by heart and retold before the frame would fully creak into the lighted rectangular on the wallpaper in our room.
The challenge to my seniority from Natasha did not feel so smarting as Sasha's disobedience. 

Just so recently as the two of us, rushed panting into the kitchen to still our thirst by water from the tap and he readily conceded to me the white tin mug with an imprint of the battleship Aurora on its side as to an older and stronger brother. 
And I, having drunk half of it, generously stretched the mug to him allowing to finish the water off – after all, that’s the way for strength transmitting.
Why was I so strong? 
Because I drank without prissiness a gulp or two from the bottle started by Sasha Nevelsky, the strongest boy in our class.
My younger brother naively listened to my naive claptrap and dutifully grabbed the outstretched mug…

He, like me, was over-credulous and one day at midday meal, when Dad took out from his soup plate a cartilage without meat and announced that who could gnaw it up would get a kilo of gingerbread from him, Sasha volunteered and, after all, gnawed and swallowed the cartilage but never got the promised gingerbread…

Mom brought home a parcel from the post office – a plywood box with brown sealing wax seals and large letters of the addresses: to our numbered mailbox from the city of Konotop.
Mom’s mother sent us a sizable piece of lard, a bag of black sunflower seeds and a hot-water bottle with moonshine gurgling in between its rubber sides.

When lightly fried in a frying pan the seeds tasted even more delicious.
We crushed them with our teeth, piling hulls away into a saucer and enjoying the sharp-nosed hearts.
And then Mom said if not to eat them at once, one after another, but collect, say, about half a glass of unhusked seeds and then sprinkle them with some sugar that would be a real thing. 

Each of us, the three children, received a glass for collecting the hearts.
Mom also equipped us with one saucer for all and a huge cornet which she deftly rolled of a newspaper and filled with the fried seeds.
We left the adults in the kitchen and went over to the children’s room.
There we lay down on the pieces of carpet runner with burn marks of a long-ago fire.

Of course, the dehulled hearts level in Natasha’s glass rose quicker than in ours, although she jabbered more than cracked.
But when Sasha began to overtake me also, my ego was hurt.
My lagging behind, in part, was the result of my distracted consideration of a cartoon on the newspaper cornet side where a pot-bellied colonialist flew off out from the continent of Africa with a black imprint of a boot kick in his shorts seat. 
I tried to husk faster, and I did not allow myself to eat any of the extracted hearts, yet I couldn’t catch up the younger in any way.
Then Mom came to the room with a glass of sugar and sprinkled a teaspoon of it over our achievements but I was already sick of them those seeds, sugar or no sugar, and in my following life I remained indifferent to sunflower seed snacks forever.

(...but still and yet, the luscious relishing the sunflower seeds is not only an effective pastime combined with a pleasure for the tongue and palate, it’s even an art.
To start with the lavish Slavonic style of the “piggy” type when the hollowed and even chewed in part black hulls are not spat out into the surrounding reality but pushed instead with the tongue out from the corner of the lips and keep sliding in a common half-chewed mass down the chin to finally fall off on the chest of the eater.
Or, quite contrary, the refined ‘filigree" style when a seed is thrown from the palm into the mouth at a distance no less than twenty-five centimeters. 
And so on to the chaste Transcaucasia manner, when the seeds for crushing are fed into the same mouths, one by one, from a fixed position between the thumb tip and the joint of the index finger so as to screen the intake of the seed, and the processed husk is not spat out but returned between the burka-like finger-screen contrivance to be scattered somewhere or put into something.
On the whole, the last of mentioned methods leaves an impression of the eater biting his thumb. 
‘Did you bite your thumb at me, Sir?!.'

Oh, yes, sunflower seeds are miles away from the dull popcorn.
However, that’s more than enough about them.
Back to the green cut-up carpet runner…)
