
It was on those runner pieces that my brother dealt a crushing blow to my authority of the eldest.
Coming home after a PE lesson, I unwary stated that doing one hundred squats at once was beyond human power. 
Sasha silently sniffled for a while and said – he would do.

The count was kept by Natasha and me.
After the thirtieth squat, I shouted that it was wrong and not fair because he was not rising in full, but Sasha did not heed and went on with squats and Natasha continued to keep the count. 
I shut up and soon after joined my sister in counting though after ‘eighty-one!' he could no longer rise even above his knees bent in the squat. 

I felt sorry for my brother over-strained with those incomplete squats. 
He staggered, tears welled up in his eyes, but the count was brought to a hundred and he barely hobbled to the sofa.
My authority collapsed like the colonialism in Africa. 
It’s good, I at least didn’t promise any gingerbread…

Where did the filmstrip projector come from?
Most likely it was a gift from the parents.
And in their room there appeared a radiola – the combination of a radio and records player.
Two in one, as they say now.
The lid on top and the side walls of the radiola gleamed with the soft gloss of brown varnish. 
Solid cardboard of the turned to the wall rear side had rows of small round portholes through which you could have a patchy view of the entrails with the white aluminum panels-houses, soft lights in the pearl-black turrets of the radio-lamps of different height and through one of the holes came out brown wire with the plug for a wall socket.

The front wall had a round green eye that lit up when you turned the radiola on.
This wall was covered with a special sound-friendly cloth through which you could trace the ovals of speakers.
Along the bottom, there was a low glass plate bordered with three knobs at its edges. 
Two on the right – the power switch with following volume adjustment (two in one), and the switch of the radio waves ranges; the knob on the left served for fine tuning to the radio wave.
The plate glass was black except for four transparent stripes from end to end, the stripes were snicked with fine notches with city names following them – Moscow, Bucharest, Warsaw.
Through those transparent strips in the glass, you could follow the progress of the red vertical slider on the other side of the plate, inside the radiola when twirling the knob of fine adjustment, 

The radio was not very interesting.
It hissed and cracked and swished along with the slider’s movements; sometimes there would float up a news reader’s voice in an unfamiliar Bucharestian language, a little further along the stripe it would be replaced with Russian repeating the news from the wall radio.

But lifting the lid on the radiola top opened the wide circle with a velvet red back to carry the record disks slipped onto the shining pin in the circle’s center.
Next to the circle, a slightly crooked poker of the white plastic adapter sat on its stand. 
The adapter should be lifted from its stand and lightly put down in the wide initial grooves of the wheeling disk which would start a song about Chico-Chico from Costa Rica, or about O, Mae Caro, or about a soldier marching in a field along the steep river bank. 

In the cabinet under the radiola there stood a lot of paper envelopes with black disks from the record factory in the Aprelev-city with its name printed on the round label in the disk center, below the title and the name of the singer and the instruction that the rotation speed was 78 rpm.

Near the adapter, there was the gearshift lever with notches for 33, 45, and 78 rpm. 
Disks of 33 rpm were smaller and turned slower than 78 rpm disks, but they—so small—had two songs on one side!
Natasha shared it with us that when you launch a 33 rpm disk at the speed of 45 rpm then even the Aleksandrov Soviet Army Choir began to sing with Lilliputian puppet voices.

Dad was not too keen on reading.
He read nothing but The Radio magazine with schematic drawings of capacitor-resistor-diodes, that was monthly brought to the mailbox on our apartment door.
And since Dad was a Party man, they also put there the daily Pravda and once a month The Agitator's Blocknote, a magazine with the hopelessly dense text of no more than one or two endless paragraphs per page, and no pictures at all.
And because of his Party membership Dad sometimes attended the Party Studies Evening School during the weeks when he worked the day shift. 
He went there after the work to write lessons in a thick copybook with leatherette covers because at the end of the academic year Dad had to pass a very difficult exam.

After one of the evening lessons, Dad brought home a couple of Party textbooks, which they distributed among the Party members learning at the Party Studies Evening School. 
But he never opened even those books.
And that, as it turned out, was his mistake.
Two years later in one of those books, he found his "stash" – a part of salary concealed from the wife for expenses at own discretion. 
He bitterly regretted and lamented over the find because it was in the money used before the monetary reform which made it funny papers... 

The Object in which we lived had more than one name and among them “the Zone”.
It remained from the times when the Object was built by zeks.
(Everybody knows that zeks live and work in “zones”.)
After two years of learning at the Party Studies Evening School, Dad and other learners were taken “out the Zone” – to the district center to have the examination.

Dad was obviously worried and kept repeating that he knew not a damn thing, although his thick copybook was written down almost to the very end.
And who cared, said he, be left for one more year at that Party Studies Evening School!

From "out the Zone" he returned in a very merry mood because they put him "three" and now all his evenings would be free. 
Mom asked him how he managed to pass the exam without knowing a damn thing.
Then Dad opened his thick copybook and showed his magic good luck charm: during the exam he made a pencil drawing of an ass with long ears and tail on the last page and  he wrote under it: ‘pull-me-through!" 
I did not know if it was worth believing Dad’s story because he was laughing all the way.
So I decided that I’d better not tell anyone about the ass that pulled my Dad from the Party Studies Evening School...

But Mom was a book reader.
She took them with her to her workplace to read them in her shifts at the Pumping Station.
The books were borrowed at the Detachment Library.
Yes, we lived not only in the Object-Zone-Mailbox but also in the Military Detachment number so and so.

The library wasn’t too far away just about one-kilometer walk.
First, down along the concrete road. 
At the end of the descent it was crossed by an asphalt road and after the crossroad, the concrete road turned into a street between two rows of wooden houses with small front gardens. 
The street ended at the House of Officers.
But about two hundred meters before reaching the House of Officers there was a turn to the right, to the one-story brick building of the Detachment Library.

Sometimes Mom took me with her there and while she was exchanging her books in the back of the building I waited in the wide front room empty of any furniture and with lots of posters on its walls.
The central poster presented the cross-sectional drawing of the atomic bomb (after we all lived in an Atomic Object). 
In addition to the posters with the bomb and atomic blast mushrooms, there were other pictures about the training of the NATO spies. 
In one of them, the spy jumping from behind on a sentry's back tore the soldier's lips with his fingers. 
That picture made me creepy but I could not look away and only thought to myself, O, how I wish Mom came out sooner with the borrowed books.

Once I pluck up the heart to ask Mom if I could also borrow books from the library.
She said that, actually, that was a library for adults but still led me to a room where a librarian woman was sitting at the desk with stacks of various thick books and my Mom told her that she did not know what to do about me and that I had already read the entire library they had at school. 
Since then I went to the Detachment's Library alone, without Mom.
Sometimes I even exchanged her books and brought home together with the two or three for me.
I kept mine scattered over the sofa and read them in a mixed way.

On one of the sofa's armrests I crawled across the front line together with the reconnaissance group Zvezda for the mission to capture a German officer, and,  rolling over to the other armrest continued to gallop with White Chief of Mayne Reid among the cacti of Mexican pampas.
And only The Legends and Myths of Ancient Greece in blue bindings I, for some reason, mostly read in the bathroom sitting on a low stool with my back to the Titan water boiler.
For such an irrational lifestyle Dad nicknamed me ‘Oblomov’, the lazybones whom he remembered from the lessons of Russian Literature at his village school…

That winter was very long.
The snowstorms gave way to the frost and the sun and some quieter snowfalls. 
Starting for school I left home at dusk as thick as the night dark.
But one day it was thawing and on my way back from school, already on the tilt between the Recruit Depot Barrack and the Block, I saw a strange dark strip to the left from the road.

I turned there and plowing the snow with my felt boots went to see what's up.
It turned out to be a strip of earth, that had come out from under the snow; a thawed patch of the ground sticky with moisture.
The next day the thawed opening extended and someone had left some black fallen fir cones in it.
And although in a day the frost hit again and covered the snow with the rind of ice and then the snowfalls set in anew and left no trace of the thaw on the hillside, I knew it for sure already, that the winter would pass... 

In mid-March, at the first lesson on Monday Seraphima Sergeevna told us to put our dip pens aside and listen to her. 
It turned out that two days before she went to the bathhouse together with her daughter and when back home she noticed that her purse had disappeared with all her teacher’s salary.
She was very upset together with her daughter who told her it’s impossible to built Communism with thieves around.
But the next day a man came to their house, a worker from the bathhouse, who had stumbled there on the purse and figured out who lost it the previous evening and brought it to her. 
And Seraphima Sergeevna said that Communism would be built and there was no doubt about it. 
And she asked us to remember the name of that working man.

(...but I have already forgotten it because "flabby gets the body, the memory gets blurred" as it stands in the dictionary by Vladimir Dahl…) 

The Saturday bathed in the sun as warm as the spring sun can be.
After school and the midday meal at home, I hurried outdoors in the courtyard where there was a general Subbotnik in progress. 
People came out of the houses into the bright shining day and shoveled the snow from the concrete paths about the whole huge courtyard.
Older children loaded the snow in big cardboard boxes and sledded it aside on a pile where it would not be in the way. 
In the ditches along the road, they dug deep channels cutting the snow with shovels and pulling out entire cubes of snow darkly wet at their bottoms. 
And through those channels, dark water ran lapping.
So came the spring and everything began changing every day…

And when they gave us at school the yellow sheets of our records with grades, the summer holidays started, bringing about the everyday games of Classlets, Hide-and-seek, and Knivelets. 

For the game of Knivelets, you need to choose a level area and draw a sizable circle on the ground. 
The circle is divided into sectors according to the number of players who, standing upright, throw a knife, in turn, into the ground of another player. 
If the hurled knife sticks in, the sector is divided with the line in the direction shown by the stuck knife's blade. 
The owner of the divided sector decides which part of it he wants to keep while the other part becomes a possession of the knife-thrower. 
When a player has not enough ground to stand upon at least with one foot he gets out of the game which goes on until there remains just one player.
You win!

(...quoting Alexander Pushkin:  
“tale’s a lie yet holds a hint
and a lesson too in it...”
As I see it now, that “knivelets” game holds the whole essence of the  world history…)

And we also played Matches. 
It's a game just for two. 
Each player sticks their thumb off their fist and inserts a match, as a spacer, between the thumb tip and the middle joint of the index finger and holds it tight. 
The matches are slowly pressed against each other, the pressure grows and the player whose match withstands it without breaking becomes the winner.
The same idea as in tapping Easter eggs against each other only you don’t have to wait a whole year for the game.
That game had wasted more than one matchbox nicked from home. 

Or we just ran hither-thither playing a "warlet" and yelling "Hurray!', or "Ta-ta-ta!", or "I've killed you!" 
But the killed did not want to fall down and he shouted back:
‘Okay! I’m at death’s door!’
And still, for a long time, he went on running to-and-fro and ta-ta-taing before to slam, at last, that door behind himself and picturesquely fall in the grass. 

The war was waged with machine-guns sawed from plank pieces. 
Some of the boys played automatic weapons of black tin, bought from a store.
They were loaded with special ammunition: rolls of narrow paper strips with tiny sulfur globs planted in them.
The globs clapped loudly when the spring trigger struck them in the strip pulled automatically through the gun.

Mom bought me a tin pistol and a box of pistons: small paper circles with the same sulfur globs.
They had to be inserted individually for each shot.
After the report, a tiny wisp of sore smelling smoke rose from under the trigger. 

When I was playing the pistol in the pile of sand by the garbage enclosure, a boy from the corner house asked me to present the weapon to him and I readily gave it away.
After all, he was an officer's son and had more rights to it than me. 

Mom refused to believe that anybody could give away his gun to another boy, and so easily too.
She demanded the truth and telling that I had lost Mom’s present.
I kept repeating my truth so she even led me to the father of that boy in the corner house. 

The officer began to put his son to shame and my Mom said she was sorry and kept apologizing that she only wanted to check and make sure I did not lie. 

That summer the boys from our Block began to bring yellowish cartridges from the shooting range in the forest.
I so much wanted to see what it was like – the shooting range, but the boys explained that you might go there on special days only when there was no shooting.
On other days they would not let you.

A special day made us wait a long time, but it still came and we went through the forest. 
The shooting range turned out to be a huge opening with a wide pit dug in the sand.
We got there by a steep descent.
The far wall of the excavation was screened with a log wall all poked with bullets, bearing riddled paper squares of shot-through targets.
The cartridges had to be found in the sand underfoot.
They were of two types – longish, with narrowing end, for the AK assault-rifle and small smooth cylinders for the TT pistol. 
The finds were loudly welcomed and busily exchanged between the boys.
I had no luck at all and only envied them.

The screams of lucky seekers drowned in an eerie silence of the shooting range displeased with our trespassing the forbidden place.

At the other end of the glade, there was a trench cut like those at the front line. 
The shields of planks retained the sand of its walls.
A narrow track of iron rails ran over the field from end to end crossing the trench too.
A large plywood mock-up of the tank rumbled on its trolley along the track when pulled by the cables of a hand winch.
The boys started to play with all those things.

I also sat in the trench once, while the plywood tank rolled overhead, and then I went to the call from the edge of the field where they needed my help.
We pulled the steel cable dragging it to the horizontal pulley so that the boys on the other side of the battlefield could easily turn the winch handle that moved the trolley with the tank.

At some point, I got inattentive and didn’t take my hand off the cable in time.
The cable pulled my little finger into the pulley.
The pain in the crashed finger squeezed an agonizing scream out of me together with a fountain of tears.
The boys at the winch, hearing my "oy-oy-oy!" and the cry of the boys around me "Stop! Finger!", managed to stop the winch when there remained just two centimeters for my little finger to get out of the pulley on the other side. 
They started to turn the winch handle in the opposite direction, dragging my little finger to where it was originally swallowed by the steel cable. 

The unnaturally flattened, dead pale finger smeared with the blood from the broken skin, emerged from the pulley jaws.
It instantly puffed up.
The boys wrapped it with my handkerchief and told me to run home. Quick! 

And I ran through the forest feeling the painful beat of the pulse in the burning finger. 
At home, my Mom, without asking anything, told me to put the little finger in the gush of water from the kitchen tap.
She bent and straightened it several times and told me not to bellow like a cow.
Then she bandaged it into a tight white cocoon and said that by the wedding day it would be like new.

(...and at the same time, childhood is not a nursery of sadomasochism of the sort: "Oh, my finger was pinched! Oh, I hit my head!" 
It’s just that some jolts leave deeper notches in the memory.

And what a pity that the memory does not hold that admiring state of incessant discovery when a speck of sand stuck to the blade of the penknife contains innumerable worlds and galaxies, when every little thing, a scrap of trash, is the promise and pledge of the future wanderings and unbelievable adventures.

We grow up gaining the protective armor necessary in the adult world: me – the doctor’s robe, you – the traffic cop’s jacket.
Each of us is a necessary cog in the society machine.
All needless things—like looking into fire extinguishers or discerning faces in the frost gripped windowpane—are chopped off.

Now on my fingers, there are some old scars. 
This one from an awkwardly wielded knife, here it was cut with an ax; and only on my little fingers, I cannot find any trace from that pulley injury. 
'Blurred gets memory, body gets flabby'...

But, hey! I know some fresher sayings, like that recent one, and well-said too: ‘summer is a miniature life"...) 

When you are a child not only summer but each and every day is a miniature life.
In childhood time is slowed down – it does not fly, it does not flow, it does not even move until you push it.
Poor children would long ago have disappeared crossing this boundless desert of frozen time if they were not rescued by games.

And in that summer, if I got bored with a game, or there was not anyone to play with, I already had a place for refuge.
Sofa.
That’s where the real life is!
The life full of adventures of Belyaev, Gaidar, Jules Verne heroes. 

However, not only a sofa is a suitable place for adventures.
Once I spent a whole summer day on the balcony, outside the parents' room, reading a book about prehistoric people – Chung and Poma.

They had hair all over their bodies, like animals, and they lived in the trees. 
But an accidentally broken off branch helped to defend themselves from the tiger and they began to carry a stick with them and walk around.
Then there was a big fire and the Ice Age began.
Their tribe wandered in search of food teaching themselves to make fire and talk to each other.
In the last chapter, the old Poma could not walk anymore and fell behind the tribe. 
Her loyal Chung remained by her side – to freeze together in the snow. 
But their children went on. 
They had already grown up and were not so hairy as their parents, and they protected themselves from the cold with the skins of other animals.

The book was not very thick, but I read it all day long, while the sun, arisen on the left, behind the forest outside the Block, imperceptibly moved across the sky over it to the sunset behind the second block on the right. 

At some point, to get rest from the uninterrupted reading, I squeezed between the vertical iron bars under the balcony railings and started to promenade along the concrete cornices when outside them.

It’s not at all scary because I tightly grasped the bars, just like Chung and Poma when they were still living in the trees.
But some unfamiliar uncle was passing underneath and scolded me and told to get back on the balcony. 
He even threatened to tell my parents.
However, they were not at home and he complained to our neighbors. 
Then they told on me to Mom and she made me promise to never-never do so again…

(...every road, when you pass it for the first time, seems to be endlessly long because you cannot yet to measure the passed part of it against what is still ahead. 
With passing it, again and again, the road shortens. 

The same thing happens to the academic year at school.
But I would never discover it if I had left the race at the beginning of the second academic year…)

It was a clear autumn day and our class went on the excursion for collecting fallen leaves.
We were led not by Seraphima Sergeevna but by the School Pioneer Leader.
First, we walked through the forest, then went down to the road leading to the Detachment Library.
We didn’t follow it but turned into a short lane between the wooden houses.
It ended at a steep slope bridged with two wide streams of plank stairs down to a real football field ringed with a cinder path.
The stairs ended with a wooden platform, from which in both directions ran half a dozen bleachers of wooden beams.

Across the field, there were no bleachers at all but only a lone white hut and a huge picture, next to it, of two footballers in a high jump fighting for the ball with their feet. 

In winter they flooded the field with water and it turned a skating ring.
I vaguely recollected a dark winter evening with rare lamps on posts along the field’s perimeter; the bitterness of grief because they gave me so too brief a ride in a high skating chair with roundly curved blades of thin iron rods...

The girls of our class stayed back collecting the leaves between the bleachers and the boys bypassed the football field along the cinder path and fled down to the river running along the other side of it.
When I reached the river bank, three or four of the boys with their pants rolled up to the knees were already wading the hasty current of the river streaming through the gap in the broken dam.
Most classmates stayed on the bank.

I started at once pulling off my boots and socks and rolling my pants up too.
Entering the water was a little scary – what if it’s too cold?
But no, it wasn't, it was quite tolerable.

The noisy, splashing stream ran around the legs under the knees and the river bottom was surprisingly smooth and even.
One of the boys wading in the river shouted through the turbulent noise that it was a slab from the destroyed dam – wow! So classy!
We waded over it, to and fro, trying not to splash the upturned pants.

And suddenly all that: the splashes of the running river, the yells of classmates, and the clear gentle day, was cut off.

I found myself in a completely different, silent world filled only with an oppressive yellowish twilight and streams of whitish bubbles waltzing up past me.
Still not realizing what had happened I waved my hands or rather they did it on their own accord and soon I broke free to the surface where the river rambled loudly and whipped with splashes my cheeks and nose, and somebody yelled, ‘drowns!’
My hands flip-flapped at random on the water until they grabbed the end of someone’s belt thrown from the edge of the slab with its mean drop-off under the water.

I was dragged out, helped to squeeze the water out of my clothes and showed a wide trail bypassing the whole stadium so as not to ran into the Pioneer Leader and peachy girls collecting fallen leaves for their autumn herbariums…

In a bird’s-eye view, the school building should have been looking like a wide angular "U" with the entrance from outside the bottom line,  in the middle.
The tiles of the lobby floor were changed in the two corridors stretching to the perpendicular wings of the building with slippery yellow parquet.

In each of the corridors, a row of wide windows along one side presented the view of the space enclosed by the building where there was no court – just a thicket of young, thin-skinned pines. 
The corridor wall opposite the windows had rare white doors with numbers and letters of the classrooms.
The same layout continued after the turn into the left wing, and in the right one, there was the school gymnasium comprising the whole height of the two-story building. 
There also was a stage with a piano behind the curtain and heaps of seats complected in threes because at times the gym was turned into the assembly hall. 

The upper floor was climbed with the staircase marches from the left corridor turn and replicated the layout of the first floor.
Only the second floor was missing the lobby, of course, with its nickel-plated stand-hangers with hooks for the schoolchildren’s hats and coats behind a low barrier.
Instead, there stretched a long corridor with the frequent wide windows to the right and more rare doors to the left.

In winter, when you go to school not in shoes but in felt boots, it’s even possible to skid along the parquet flooring, unless, of course, you wear black rubber galoshes over your boots.
At first, my felt boots were sorely rubbing behind my knees, but Dad slashed them a bit with his shoemaker’s knife.
My Dad knew all and could do anything.

In winter you reached school still in the dark.
Sometimes I wandered around empty classrooms.
I peeped into the inner cavity of the small bust of Comrade Kirov on the windowsill in the seventh grade. 
It looked much alike to the inside of the porcelain dog statuette in the parents' room. 

Once, when I switched the light in the eighth, I saw a wax apple forgotten on the teacher’s desk.
I fully realized that it was not real yet the apple seemed so inviting and juicy and as if glowing with some inner light that I bit the hard unyielding wax, leaving dents from my teeth on its tasteless side.
I felt ashamed to be fooled by a bright fake.
Yet, who saw it?
I turned off the light and quietly went out into the corridor. 

(...twenty-five years later, in the school of the Karabakh village of Noraguoogh I saw exactly the same wax imitation, with the imprint of a child's bite and smiled knowingly – I saw you kid!..) 
