
 
When down the river opened the view of the second (and the last) bridge in the Zone, I decided not to go any further but have a try at the Rechka’s sharp bend under the high precipitous bank.
And right there happened that for what people go fishing at all.
The float did not twitch or flinch but slowly and deeply went under the surface.
I pulled back and the vibrating pole in my hands showed mighty resistance in response.
No fish wiggling in the flight. 
I had to pull the tight line all the way close to the bank and drag the fish onto the dry land.

It twisted and curled in the sand and I felt scared because had never seen the like of it: a dark blue piece of a thick hose. 
I threw the ‘miserables' back to the river filled the can with water and lowered the pray into it but the fish had to stand there vertically – its length did not allow it to tumble in the can. 
Two boys came from the bridge, they had already finished fishing and were on their way home.
They asked me about the catch and I showed them the fish.
‘Burbot!’ identified one of them instantly.

When they left I realized that I couldn’t catch anything better, it was time to cut the line and go home.
I walked and the glory ran before me – a couple of boys met me some hundred meters from the Block. 
They wanted to look at the burbot.
And when I was already nearing our house an unfamiliar woman from the corner building stopped me on the path to ask if that was true.
She looked into the can at the round muzzle of the burbot turned asleep by that time and asked me to give it to her.
I immediately and unquestioningly handed over the milk-can and waited while she carried the fish to her home and brought the can back…

In those years, the years were much longer than nowadays and they were filled with much more diverse events. 
For instance, in the same summer with burbot my sister, and brother, and I went to the pioneer camp, though we were not yet young pioneers.

One sunny morning the children from our Block, and from the neighbor one, and the ‘lowlanders'-children from the wooden houses at the Gorka's bottom were collected at the House of Officers where two buses and two trucks with canvas tops were waiting for us. 
Parents gave their respective children suitcases with clothes and bags with all sorts of sweet and tasty things and waved after the departing convoy.

We passed the bridge at the Pumping Station and the white gate of the Checkpoint,  leaving the Object behind the barbed wire that surrounded all of it together with its forest, hills, marshes and the piece of the Rechka.
After the Checkpoint, we turned to the right climbing a prolonged tilt of the highway which we followed for the following half an hour before one more turn to the right, to a forest dirt road among the mighty pine trees.
In the forest, the convoy had to slow down and another half an hour later we drove up to another gate in another fence of barbed wire. 
However, that fence wasn't doubled and there were no sentries at the gate because it was a pioneer camp.

Not far from the gate stood a one-story building of the canteen and rooms for educators, and paramedic, and the Director, and nondescript employees at the camp.
Behind that building, there was a wide field with a high iron mast of ‘giant steps' with canvas loops at the end of chains hanging from the wheel at the mast top but nobody ever used the attraction. 
Along the row of high birch trees at the edge of the field there ran a neat path ending with a pit for broad jumps.
Across the field, the forest began again cut off by the barbed wire nailed to wider tree trunks. 

To the left of the canteen building, a row of green bushes separated from it four square canvas tents with board floor and four beds each for the ninth graders from the first platoon. 
Then followed a level clearing with another iron mast, this time more slender and without chains but with thin cable for the Red Flag of the camp.

In the morning and in the evening the platoons were lined-up along three sides of a big rectangular, facing inside.
The Camp Director, the Senior Pioneer Leader, the mast, and the camp accordionist presented the fourth—really rarefied—side to the formation.
The commanders of the platoons, starting with the youngest, in turn, approached the Senior Pioneer Leader to report that their platoon was lined-up. 
During the report the commanders and the Senior Pioneer Leader held their right arms up, hands straightened, diagonally across their respective faces.
With the reports received, the Senior Pioneer Leader did several steps forward, turned around and approached the Camp Director to report that the camp was lined-up.
Then the Director commanded to hoist or to lower the Red Flag of the camp, depending on the time of day.
The accordionist stretched the bellows of his instrument and played the hymn of the Soviet Union.
Two rank-and-file pioneers called out by the Senior Pioneer Leader for their merits in the camp life approached the mast.
Standing on its both sides, they pulled the cable running through two pulleys—one at the mast top, another a meter from the ground—in turn, changing their hands, and the Red Flag of the camp jerkily crawled along the mast; up in the morning and down in the evening, while the lined-up formation stood with their right arms up, hands straightened, diagonally across their respective faces.


Next to the clearing with the flag mast down a short slope there stood a squat long barrack of planks with two separate bedroom-wards filled with rows of spring-mesh iron beds.
Both wards ended with a door to the square room taking the whole width of the barrack.
There was a small stage with a screen for showing movies and rows of seats for the spectators. 

On the day of arrival, before receiving mattresses and beds the children dropped their bags and suitcases on the floor and went amok leap-racing along the rows of bed spring-meshes tossing you up in the air.
The main thing in that sport is not to run into a jumper running in the opposite direction.
Then everyone opened their suitcases and bags and started to enjoy the sweets flashing them down with the gulps of treacly condensed milk from blue and white tin-cans. 
It turned out that for condensed milk consuming neither an opener nor a spoon was needed.
Just find a nail sticking out on the wall and hit the can lid against it to punch a hole.
Make sure the hole be at the lid edge and not in its center.
Then another hole at the opposite edge and – here you are! – the milk can easily be sucked out through one of the holes without smearing your lips and cheeks as when eating with a spoon from an open tin-can. 
And if you are an unskillful puncher or not tall enough to reach the nail in the wall then ask someone of the elder boys – they would punch it for you for only two sucks from you can. 

In the middle of the square for the lined-up formation, there were patches of loosened ground one for each of the platoons. 
Every day the children laid out the date in their platoon patch with green leaves or chopped off flower heads to win the competition for the best design of the Platoon Calendar. 

On Sundays, parents came to the camp by bus. 
They treat their children with gingerbread, and sweets, and – lemonade!
Our Mom was taking us someplace in the green shade of the trees and watched as we chewed and swallowed, and asked questions about the camp life while Dad snapped his brand new FED-2 camera.

Consuming the treats, we were sharing that the camp life was like camp life.
Not long before all the platoons went out for a hike in the forest and on our return – surprise!
There was a restaurant waiting for us on the floor-boarded platform of the pergola next to the cinema in the barrack.
It turned out that the girls of the senior platoon hadn't participated in hiking and instead set up tables and chairs in the pergola and cooked the dinner together with the canteen workers.

Handwritten menu sheets were put on the tables and everyone was calling the girls with the adult word ‘Waitress!' 
And they approached to receive an order for the ‘May Salad' or the ‘Onion Salad'. 
When the restaurant was over, I accidentally overheard two of the waitresses giggling between themselves that all demanded the ‘May Salad’ but the ‘Onion Salad’ was much more delicious and so their—the waitresses—share became bigger because of the fools hooked by sheer words on a piece of paper.
And I promised myself in future never get fooled with tinsel wrappers...

It’s a pity, that the camp schedule retained a vestige from the kindergarten past under the new name of “stiff hour”.
After the midday meal, everyone would go to their wards and to their beds. 
Get asleep!
Sleeping in the middle of the day just does not work and the two-hour long ‘stiff hour' progressed at a snail rate. 
All the spooky stories had been listened to once again for an umpteenth time: and about the woman in white who drank her own blood, and about the flying black hand with no body to it strangling everybody, and all the other gory horrors there still remained the same thirty-eight minutes before the call 'Get up!'…

Once at the midday meal in the canteen I noticed how three boys from my platoon were exchanging meaningful nods and some secret code signs with their hands.
Clearer than the daylight – there was some collusion.
And me?
And I accosted one of them so stubbornly that he revealed the secret to me.
They conspired to flee the ‘stiff hour' that day and go to the forest where one of them knew a spot with such raspberries that had more berries than leaves in their bushes. 

The midday meal over, the boys ran stealthily in the opposite to the barrack direction.
I followed them, repulsed the leader’s attempt at turning me back to the ward-bedroom and crawled after the others under the barbed wire into the forest.
We armed ourselves with the rifles made of dry tree branches and walked along a wide tread-path among the pines and shrubs.
Then the commander turned into some glade after which we again went into the forest but already without a tread. 
We wandered there for a long time without finding any raspberries but only the bushes of wolf-berries which you should skip eating because it’s poisonous.
Finally, we got fed up with the useless search and the commander confessed he could not find the promised raspberries. 
He was reproached with:
‘Eew! You!’
And we continued wandering through the forest until we found the barbed wire nailed to the trees to form a fence.

Following the prickly guidance of the camp fencing we went out to the already familiar tread-path and our perked-up commander ordered us to fall in.
It seemed we were going to start playing ‘War-Mommy’.
We executed the command and lined-up along the tread-path pressing the dried boughs of our automatic rifles to our stomachs.
And suddenly two grown-up women—the camp caretakers—jumped from behind a thick bush with a loud yell:
‘Drop your weapons!’
We let our sticks fall and in the already formed file were convoyed to the camp gate. 
One of the captors walked ahead of us the other closed the formation.

At the evening all-out lining-up, the Director announced that there happened an incident at the camp and the parents of those involved would be informed besides there would be raised the question of our expelling from the camp. 
After the lining-up was over my brother and sister came up to me from their junior platoon:
‘Now, you’ll have it for sure!’
‘Ah!’ dismissively waved I trying to conceal the fear caused by the uncertainty of the punishment for getting raised the question of expelling.
That uncertainty tormented me till the end of the week with the Parents’ Day on Sunday.
Our parents came as usually and Mom shared between us condensed milk and biscuits and never mentioned my involvement in the disruptive occurrence.
A beam of hope glowed for me – perhaps, the Director forgot to inform them.
When our parent left Natasha told me that Mom had already known about the incident and in my absence asked her who else was among the runaways.
On getting the complete report she turned to Dad and said:
‘Well, you bet, them those aren’t going to be expelled.’

In the end of the summer there occurred some change in the way of the Block's life. 
Every morning and evening a garbage truck came to the courtyard honking loudly and stopped for the tenants of the houses to bring their garbage buckets and empty them into its dump.
They also took away the trash boxes from the garbage enclosure opposite the back of our house and nailed up its gate.

In September in the field between the Bugorok-Knoll and the nailed up enclosure there rumbled and clattered a bulldozer moving mountains of the earth.
When it left there remained a wide field two meters lower than the former one with footprints of its caterpillar tracks in all directions.
A month later they organized a Sunday of Collective Free Work for adults only but my Dad allowed me to go with him too.
On the edge of a wood behind the next block there stood a long building similar to the barrack in the pioneer camp and the people participating in the Sunday of Collective Free Work started to destroy it from all the ends.
My Dad climbed to the top. 
He tore away whole chunks of the roof and sent them falling down shouting his farewell:
‘Eh! Pulling down differs from building up – the soul doesn’t pain!’

I did not like the Sunday of Collective Free Work very much.
They would drive you away everywhere:
‘Don’t come closer!’
And just listening to the screams of the nails being torn from the beams and boards gets boring quite soon…

(...I cannot now recollect – on the eve of that Sunday or immediately after it Nikita Khrushchev was deposed and Leonid Brezhnev became the main leader of the USSR in his place.
Ew! 
And all that when there remained no more than mere eighteen years before the establishing of Communism in our country!..)

In his very practical book, Seton-Thompson insists that bows have to be made of ash-tree boughs. 
But could you find an ash-tree at the Object, eh?
Its forest and woods was populated with pines and fir trees, and also deciduous birch and aspen, and all the rest might be considered just shrubs. 
That’s why, following the advice of the neighbor from our landing, Stepan Zimin, I made my bows of the juniper.
It’s important to do the right choice, the juniper for a bow should not be too old with lots of side branches, nor too thick which would be impossible to bend.
A tree of about one and a half meter tall would be the thing, both springy and strong.
The arrow shot from the bow made from such a juniper rises in the gray autumn sky about thirty meters, you'd barely see it, and then it falls precipitously and sticks in the ground because its arrowhead is a nail fixed with electrician's tape. 
The arrow shaft should be made of a thin plaster lath: split it lengthwise and round the shaft off with a knife and sandpaper. 
Only my arrows had no fletching although Seton-Thompson explained how to do it.
But where could I get the feathers?
No use to ask Dad there's nothing but machinery at his work. 

At the winter holidays, I learned that the boys of our two blocks often went to the Regiment to watch movies in the Regiment Club. 
The Regiment was where the soldiers continued their army service after graduating the Recruit Depot.
Going there for the first time was a bit scary because the children exchanged vague rumors about some soldier strangling some girl in the forest.
No child could explain how and why but the bad soldier must have been a “blackstrapper” while in the Regiment all the soldiers wore red shoulder straps.
The way to the Regiment was not short.
Two times as long as to school and after bypassing it the trail became wider and straighter and most of the way under the big fir trees until you went out onto an asphalt road.
It led to the gate with sentries but they did not stop boys and you could go on to the building with the signboard Regiment Club.

On entering the building you got into a long corridor with three double doors in its blind wall.
The other wall had windows in it and between them, as well as between the double doors, there hung a row of same-sized pictures portraying different soldiers and officers with short descriptions of their selfless deeds and heroic deaths defending our Soviet Motherland.

The wide double doors opened to a huge hall without windows and filled with rows of plywood seats facing the wide stage behind velvet crimson curtains partly drown both sides to open the wide white screen for movies.
The passage from the stage to the back wall with square black holes for movies projection divided the hall in two.
The soldiers came in in groups stomping their boots at the boards of the paint-coated floor and gradually filled the seats and the hall with the thick hum of their talking to each other.
Time dragged on very slowly.
There were no pictures on the whitewashed walls and I re-read, over and over again, the two inscriptions on the red-clothed frames that hid the speaker boxes on both sides of the stage. 
A portrait of a head with a wide beard and a thick turf of hair was mounted onto the left frame followed by the lines of words: 
"In science, there is no wide highway, and only who fears no fatigue and keeps climbing its stony tread-paths will reach its shiny peaks." 
The signature beneath explained whose words and head it was – “K. Marx.”
And next to the right half of the withdrawn velvet curtain a head without hair and with a small wedge-like beard made it clear even before reaching the signature that it was Lenin who said:
“The cinema is not only an agitator but also a remarkable organizer of the masses.”

As the soldiers filled the hall the schoolboys moved from the front rows over to the stage and watched the movies from the back side of the screen.
What's the difference if the Amphibian Man made his dive not from the left to the right but on the contrary? 
And the rebel Kotovsky would all the same escape from the courtroom through the window.
Although, some boys stayed in the hall perching on the armrests between the seats. 
The soldiers did not mind.

At times in the darkness illuminated by the flicks of the running movies there sounded a yell from one of the three doors:
‘Lance-corporal Solopov!’
Or else:
‘The second squad!’
But any yell ended the same way:
‘To the exit!’
If the movies suddenly broke off and the hall sank in complete darkness there arose a deafening wall of whistles and rambling boot stomp at the floor and yells ‘shoemaker!!’ from all the sides.

After the movies at the Regiment, we walked home through the night forest retelling each other the episodes of what we had just watched together. 
‘Now! I say! The way he punched him!’
‘Hey! Hey! I say! The guy never knew what hit him!’

Of course, the Regiment Club was not the only place for movie-going. 
There always was the House of Officers but there you had to buy a ticket and, therefore, come with your parents and they never had time for movies.
True, on Sundays, they demonstrated there a free film for schoolchildren: black and white fairy tales or a color film about a young partisan pioneer Volodya Dubinin. 

One winter Sunday morning I told Mom that I was going out to play.
‘Think before talking! Who would be playing outside in such a weather?’
Behind the glass pane of the kitchen window, the murky dusk was scraped by the lines of the scudding rime snow. 
‘See what a mayhem?’
But I croaked and grumbled and did not want to leave her alone until Mom got angry and told me to go wherever I wished. 
I went out into the desolate courtyard. 
No one at all.

The courtyard looked too gloomy to stay there.
Turning my face away from the slapping and whipping by the wild snow torrents I went round the house corner and crossed the road to the field next to the abundant garbage enclosure. 
There obviously was also nobody except me but I couldn’t see myself.
All I could see was the complete turmoil full of the violent blizzard lashing the dull gray world with the long snake-like belts of prickly snow.
I felt lonely and wanted to be back home.
But Mom would say:
‘So I told you!’
And the younger ones would start to laugh.

Then from the far edge of the field where long-long ago they played volleyball and gorogki there came a voice of the aluminum loudspeaker on top of a wooden pillar not seen in so hurly-burly a weather. 
‘Dear children! Today we’ll learn a song about the Merry Drummer. Listen to it first.’
And the well-trained quire of child voices began to sing of a clear morning at the gate and the maple drumsticks in the hands of the Merry Drummer. 
The song was over and the announcer commenced to dictate the lyrics so that the listeners by their radios would write it down word for word. 
‘Get up ear-ly, get up ear-ly, get up ear-ly, with the first light of the mor-ning by the gate...’

And I already was not alone in the grim world getting its lashing.
I waded through the snowdrifts but the snow could not get me because of my thick pants tight over my felt boots.
The announcer finished dictating the first verse and let me listen to it sung by the quire. 
Then he dictated the second also with the subsequent singing through it, and the third.
‘Now, listen to the whole song, please.’

And there became quite a lot of us – the Drummer, the children with their merry voices, and even the blizzard turned into one of us and wandered with me across the field hither and thither.
Only that I kept falling through the crust into the sifted powder snow under it and the blizzard danced above scattering its prickly pellets.

When I got home Mom asked:
‘Well, seen anyone there?’
I said ‘no’ but no one laughed.

The solitary walk in the big company under the dictation of the Merry Drummer laid me up in bed with the high temperature. 
Everyone went to work and to school.
With the books from the Detachment Library finished and no one around to go there to exchange them for me, I had to take one from our one-shelf home library in the parents' room. 
I chose the one that for a long time had been attracting me by its title and at the same time repelling with its thickness: ‘War and Peace' by Tolstoy, in four volumes. 
The opening chapter confirmed my fears by its text in French, page after page, yet it eased off when I noticed that there was the translation in the page notes below.

Because of that novel, I did not notice my illness. 
I hastily swallowed the medicines and returned to Pierre, Andrey, Petya, Natasha; at times forgetting to take the thermometer out from the armpit.
I read all the volumes with the epilogue and only the concluding part – the discourse on predestination I couldn't overcome. 
Its endless sentences turned into a glossy wall, I climbed a bit up just only to inevitably slip back to its foot.
The insurmountable wall stretched in both directions and I couldn't figure out where I got there from. 
I had to close the last volume without reading up to the end.

(...a couple of years ago I re-read the novel from cover to cover and said, that if a person was able to write like Tolstoy in that concluding part of "War and Peace" then why to trouble themselves with all that prelude fiction including the epilogue? 
Perhaps, I kinda showed off, in part, but only just in part…)

And while I was lying on my folding bed mixed with the field of Austerlitz, life was not standing still.
My sister and brother were bringing news that the trash enclosure had been pulled down and a shed was erected in its place.
They turned the field between the shed and the Bugorok-Knoll into a skating rink! 
As big as all that field leveled by the solitary bulldozer in autumn.
Then there arrived a fire-engine, they dropped the hoses on the ground and leaked tons of water.
It's a real skating-rink now! 
And they lend out skates at the shed.
Anyone can come and borrow skates or bring their own and go skating!

I did not want to lag behind the life and quickly recovered.
However, I was late.
They were no longer lending skates at the shed and you had to bring them with you.
The benches in the shed were still in place and you could sit down and put on the skates you had brought and leave your felt boots under the bench or in a locker while you were skating. 

Actually, there were two sheds, back to back, and two doors above a high wooden porch.
The right door led to the locker-room and the other to the warm-up room with the skate grinder and a stove made of a wide iron barrel.
The hot fire crackled in the stove to warm your frozen hands or dry up your mittens. 
You had to look out though – were the mittens not removed in time they started to smell with singed wool of which they are knitted.
Yak!

No words could ever describe my desire to be a skater.
How deliciously crunched the ice under the steel of the skates!
And you didn’t run, you flew like a swift with the skates having turned into wings!

I started learning with double-bladed skates with strings for tying them to the boots.
I was laughed at for using such a kindergarten plaything.
‘Snegoorki’ came in their place, the round-nosed skates of one blade each, but also with the strings for tying.
And nothing came out of them, no flight, no joy, just some odd iron pieces on my felt boots.
Finally, Mom brought from someplace real “half-Canadians” – riveted to the shoes of their own with long white band laces.
With those real skates hung over my shoulder I hurried to the locker-room at the skating rink.
I put them on and went out on the ice.
All I could get there was an awkward hobbling back and forth.
The skates did not want to stand evenly. 
They kept falling in or out painfully twisting my feet.
I had to return back to the locker-room walking the snow drifts around the skating rink where dense snow kept the skate blades upright and they no longer tried to break my ankles out. 

The last attempt occurred in the evening when Dad came home from work and had his supper.
At my request, he tightly laced the "half-Canadians" over a pair of thick-knitted wool socks making them one with my legs. 
I went out and clattered down the stairs holding onto the railing.
From where the railing ended to the entrance door I walked with my hand to the wall.
The outer wall of the house supported me on my way around the building.
Further on there were auxiliary snow drifts but the road I had to cross fluttering my hands as a tightrope walker. 
At last, I got to the skating rink but it all happened again – the skates were breaking my feet in and out despite the tight lacing. 
For some time I stood there in pain and envy to the crowd of wing-footed lucky ones rushing around me then started the endless agonizing way back.

(...and never more in my life, I tried to skate. 
Who’s born to crawl – cannot fly…)

On one of the clear days off our landing neighbor, Stepan Zimin, called me and his son Yura to have a ski walk in the forest.
For that occasion, Dad went down to our basement section and brought the skies. 
Each of them had a leather loop in the middle to put the nose of your felt boot into and a length of the white rubber band like that in underpants. 
That band, tied in a loop upon the leather loop, embraced the felt boot heel preventing the ski slide away.
Both Yura and I had a pair of ski poles each but Stepan went out with just skies on his feet and—whew!—he did not need the poles!
He glided down the Hillock and we followed, falling and getting up to glide further.
Then we turned into the forest to the left from the Recruit Depot Barracks and walked through the almost impenetrable thicket of the half-dried pine trees.
We saw a couple of square holes under the snow there.
Stepan explained they were dugouts during the war for the soldiers to live in. 
I couldn’t fit it into my mind.
The war ended before my birth, that’s ages and ages ago.
In the course of so long a time all the trenches, and dugouts, and bomb-holes should be completely blurred and effaced from the earth...

Never again Stepan Zimin went out for a ski walk but I liked skiing and started to glide down the hillocks and knolls nearest to the road surrounding the two blocks.

When they held ski competition among the school children I, of course, volunteered to participate and on the eve of the cross-country race asked Dad to change the worn out rubber bands on the leather loops of my skies. 
He casually dismissed the problem – they’d hold on, nothing to bother about.

The start was given from the glade where in autumn they pulled down the barrack on the Sunday of Collective Free Work.
From the start point the ski track went into the forest and after zigzagging there for a couple kilometers returned back. 
Start and finish at the same point: two in one.
Our group of fourth-and-fifth graders was flagged off all at once with a senior schoolboy running ahead of us so that we wouldn’t go astray at a wrong ski track.

I was getting overtaken and I was overtaking others with the eager shouts ‘The track! The track!’ so that they give way along two narrow paths of the pressed snow.
And then I reluctantly stepped aside into the untrodden sticky snow when they shouted ‘The track!' behind my back, because that's the rule. 
We ran and we glided.
Down a steep slope, we piled in over each other. 
I got from the pile one of the first and frantically rushed ahead but some two hundred meters before the finish that meanie rubber band burst on my right felt boot and the ski ran away. 
Keeping back the burning tears I reached the finish line in only left ski driving the right one with kicks along its part in the ski track.
The refs liked it, they laughed, but I, on coming home, burst into tears:
‘I knew it! I warned! I asked!’

Mom went on at Dad.
He wanted to talk back but did not find what to say.
The next day he fixed to the leather loops of the skies an elastic band of ivory color, as thick as a little finger, which he brought from his work. 

(...that fixture never failed and even twenty-two years later the band served as it should. 
Skies, on the whole, are dogged long-liver...)
