
My Dad had a hair cutting machine – a nickel-plated animal with two horns.
Or rather they were two slender handles.
Dad took them both in one hand and put the machine in motion by squeezing and loosening his grip on the handles.
On the day of a haircut, my brother and I were in turn seated in the middle of the kitchen on a stool placed on a chair so that we would sit higher and Dad wouldn't have to stoop down to us. 
Mom tightly wound a white bed sheet around the neck of her son—whose turn it was—and fixed the sheet with a clothespin.
Then she held a large square mirror in front of the brothers, in turn, and shared her advice to Dad.
And Dad waved away the advice with his nose because his right hand was busy with the machine and with his left hand he held the customer’s head and turned it from side to side, and forward, and back.
And even his jaw was busy moving from side to side in time with the clicking of the handles in his palm.
Sometimes the machine did not cut the hair but pulled it. 
It hurt.
At such moments Dad gave an angry snort and sharply blew in the machine in his hand, and then went on with his work.

Once the blowing didn’t bring the machine to order and it continued to pull the hair and Sasha started to cry.
Since that day we visited the hairdresser salon not just before the school was starting after summer but whenever Mom decided that we had become too shaggy. 

Dad learned photography himself from a thick book.
His camera FED-2 was fixed inside its leather brown case which had a narrow shoulder strap of leather also.
When shooting, you had to unbutton the case from behind take pictures with the case's face hanging under the camera then close it back again. 
The camera was unscrewed from the case only to change the cassette with the film after all its thirty-six frames were clicked. 
Then the film was rewind, in the complete darkness, from its cassette into a small round cistern with the tight fitting lid to be treated with the developer solution.
After five minutes the solution was poured out, the film washed with water and treated with the fixing solution then washed once again.
For drying the film was pinned on a rope like a laundry.
But if before that final washing the film had been exposed to the tiniest beam of light it would be spoiled and instead of frames, you’d have just a gleaming black ribbon of a film, a throwaway.

When there collected several developed films, Dad arranged a photo lab in the bathroom.
He covered the bath with two shields of planks he made for the purpose.
They served as the desk on which he put photo projector with its lenses looking down.
In the photo lab, Dad used a special red lamp, because of the photo paper's sensitivity and only the red light didn't spoil it. 

And even in the projector, there was a movable light filter of red glass,  just below the lens, so that light-sensitive photo paper would not become a throwaway while you're adjusting the image sharpness with the lens.
All images in the film were negative: black faces with white lips and eye sockets, and the hair was also white.
After the sharpness adjustment, the red filter was turned aside so that full light from the projector would pour through the film onto the paper and Dad would count down the seconds of the exposure and then turn the filter back in its place. 

Then the still white sheet of paper from under the projector was put into a small plastic bath filled with the developer solution set close to the red light lamp unable to disperse the black darkness in the room which was not a room already but a sorcerer’s chamber.
And then the magic started – under the dim light of the red lantern on a clean white sheet, there gradually appeared clothes, hair, facial features. 
The pictures should not stay in the developer for too long or their paper would turn into black wet squares.
They were taken out with the pincers, rinsed in plain water and placed in the next small bath with the fixer, otherwise, they would blacken all the same; then, after five to ten minutes, the ready pictures were transferred into a large basin with water. 

When the printing was over, Dad turned the light in the bathroom on.
The charmer’s chamber disappeared giving way to a small workshop.
Dad took the wet pictures from the basin, put them face down on Plexiglas sheets and ran rubber roller over their backs so that they stuck well.
Those glasses he put against the wall in the parents’ room and the next day the dried-up photos fell off to the floor as leaves in autumn, but white, smooth and glossy.

Here am I with round eyes and the neck bandaged because of a sore throat. 

Brother Sasha looking so credulously into the camera. 

Mom alone, or with her friends, or with the neighbors.

And that is Natasha with her nose up in the air and the eyes on something else happening to the right and the ribbon in her braid has gotten loose, of course...

Besides the photography, Dad also was a radio fan, that’s why he subscribed The Radio magazine with all kinds of charts.
I liked the smell of melted rosin in the kitchen where he worked with his soldering iron collecting this or that scheme from The Radio.
One time he assembled a radio receiver the size a bit more than the FED-2 camera case.
At first, it was a thin brown board with radio parts soldered to it, then he made a small box of plywood, polished and lacquered it and hid the board inside.
There were just two knobs on the box's face: for adjusting the volume and finding a radio station. 
Then he sewed the case for the receiver from thin leather because he could work with the awl and knew how to make a stitching thread from a usual one rubbing it with wax and pitch.
Finally, he attached a narrow shoulder strap to the case so that you could carry it and still have your hands free.
Later on, he made a special machine on a stool to do bookbinding and bound his radio magazines into volumes – one for each year. 
He had just golden hands.

And Mom, of course, had golden hands too because she cooked tasty meals, sewed with her Singer machine and once a week did a general washing in the washing machine "Oka". 
At times she trusted me with squeezing the water out of the washing by turning the crank of the rubber rollers fixed on top of the machine.
You stick a corner of a washed thing in between the rollers, turn the crank and they pull it in squeezing brooks of water back into the machine basin.
And the thing crawls out behind the rollers thinly pressed and wrung out.

But hanging the washed things was a job for adults because there were no linen ropes in the courtyard and everybody dried their washing in the attics of the houses. 
Only Dad could lift a heavy basin with half wet things up the vertical iron ladder through the hatch above the landing.

Yet one time he, with his golden hands, created a long-term problem for himself.
It’s when he made a ‘bug’ in the electric meter so that it would not rotate even with all the lights on and the washing machine buzzing busily in the bathroom.
Dad said it was for the sake of saving but he was worried and afraid that they would catch us and fine.
Why torment yourself so much because of some savings?

But my Mom remains irreproachable, except for those yellow corduroy shorts with suspenders that she sewed for me in the kindergarten.
I really hated them.
And as it turned out not for naught – it was in those shorts that the red ants had so severely bitten me... 

During one of my solo forest walks I went out into a glade and felt there was something wrong with it, yet what?
Aha! That thin smoke did not belong to the usual picture.
And then I saw flames, almost transparent in the sunlight, fluttering, charring the bark of trees and creeping along the thick carpet of dry pine needles on the ground.
So, the forest’s on fire!
At first, I tried to just trample out the flames on the needles but it did not work. 
Only the broken off trunk of a juniper with lots of dense branches could suppress the flames. 
And it served me also to kill the fire on the trees. 

When the fight with the fire ended victoriously, I saw that the burned-out area was not so big: some ten to ten meters. 
My shirt and hands were smeared with black soot.
I didn’t mind because the battle dirt is not dirty.
More than that, I even ran my sooty hand over my face to smear it too that everyone could see – that's the hero who saved the forest from the death in the fire. 
Unfortunately, I met no one on the way home.
Walking I dreamed of being written about in The Pioneer Pravda, where they published an article about a pioneer who signaled with his red tie to the locomotive driver about the broken railway. 

Already entering the courtyard I met at last two passers-by.
They looked at me but none of them asked:
‘Where's this black soot in your face from? It seems you were quenching a forest fire, weren't you?' 
At home, Mom yelled at me for going around so dirty and no washing machine would catch up with keeping my shirts clean. 
I felt hurt but suffered it silently.

In summer evenings the children of the Block and mothers of those kids who were yet to be looked after went out of the courtyard on the surrounding road of concrete.
They were waiting for the platoon from the Recruit Depot Barracks to come up to the road to drill their evening promenade.
On reaching the concrete surface of the road they started to parade march. 
As in a magic transformation, they seemed to merge into a united creature—a closed squad—that had one leg all the length of the marching flank, fused of dozens of black boots that simultaneously broke away from the road and fell down one step further advancing the whole formation farther for that one step. 
It looked so fascinating a creature! 

Then the sergeant-major walking along by its side abruptly commanded:
‘Sing off!’
And from the midst of the compact mass throbbing in time to the mutual ‘plonk!’ of the boot soles against the concrete, a young vibrating tenor rose solo to be followed in a few steps further by the thunder of the supporting chorus:

...we are the paratroopers,
   the wide sky is all for us... 

The formation went on and on to the corner of the next block with its inhabitants waiting for it to march by and some children from ours followed it as a running tail and the young mothers looked in the wake of the marching soldiers.
And the all-embracing serenity permeated the evening because we were the strongest and so reliably protected by our paratroopers from all the NATO spies in the anteroom of the Detachment Library...

They brought long iron pipes into the courtyard. 
If you hit such a pipe with a stick it would ring loudly and longly.
I didn't care about lengthening the sound, all I wanted was to repeat the drum roll with which the Whites went with a ‘psychic' attack against Anka the machine gunner in the movies ‘Chapaev'. 
Day after day coming from school I tried and tried filling the courtyard with ding and dong – no go, nothing like that roll.
The pipes were buried too soon and my musical self-education got interrupted…

The blocks of the Gorka got furnished with gas.
They installed the gas stove was in the kitchen hanged the white box on the wall to light the gas when heating water to wash up or take a bath. 
Titan the Boiler disappeared from the bathroom and firewood was needed no more. 
Our basement section with Dad's workshop became roomier...

One day in the early summer when the parents were at work I came down to our basement section and took away Dad’s big ax because I and some other boy wanted to make a fire in the forest.
We descended into the thicket behind the Bugorok-Knoll and started to climb up another hill,
On the steep slope there stood a small fir tree about a meter and a half.
From the moment of entering the forest with the ax in my hands, I had had an overwhelming desire to put it to use.
And there it stood before me the one and a half meter opportunity.
One or two strokes and the fir tree was lying on the slope.
And I stood by it and could not understand what for?
You couldn't use it for making a bow nor even for a fake Kalashnikov gun to play ‘War-Mommy'. 
Why did I kill the fir so aimlessly?
I no longer wanted to make any fire or have a walk.

I needed as soon as possible get rid of the ax – the accomplice in my stupid cruelty.
I took it back to the basement section and from that time went to the forest unarmed...

(...see? Such a prissy charming boy.
But the core of this pathetic self-praise through self-chastening is, actually, true.
However, don’t hurry to enter your Daddy in the ‘good men’ list.
I am too unstable for that.
Today I’m as tenderhearted as you can wish, but tomorrow…
Well, I don’t know.

When my bachnagh (this word in Karabakh Armenian means ‘husband of sister-in-law’) was preparing the wedding of his eldest daughter the relatives were helping with all they could.
Not with money though because he wouldn’t accept it – the expenses for such an occasion are born by the happy father.
That's the tradition.
The acceptable help comprises, mainly, cookery work.
The standard set of core wedding treats at the city House of Celebrations is paid in cash, but the standard is diversified by lots of additions cooked by aunts, grandmothers, mothers, sisters, daughters of the immediate and distant relatives.
Kinship, aka clan relationships, are verily alive and kicking in Karabakh.
The culinary help in wedding preparations is sort of love labor using the products purchased by the celebration organizer.
However, some products need certain preliminary treatment and you can't deny that slaughtering a dozen of chickens on the balcony in a five-story building is a somewhat more complicated action than in not-finished-yet but still a private house. 
That’s why the chickens were brought to me.

They dumped them in the unfinished hallway and left, busy with other innumerable other wedding-preparatory charges. 
Jedem – seiner, as a German saying runs.
So those fifteen living creatures are lying on the dusty ground with their legs tied and I am towering above them with a freshly whetted knife in my hand and we all know what we are there for.
Fifteen is not just one and there is the deadline when kinswomen come to pluck the initially processed products.
And each of the future products is still alive, having its own coloring, its age, its point of view on what is happening, its individual reserve of energy, which determines the loudness of the protestations and protraction of the flutter with the head chopped off.
You can’t do the job without being methodical.
So I turned into a robot methodically repeating a set of the same movements.
Fifteen times…
Sometimes I looked through the window opening without a frame on a white cloud high in the blue sky. 
So clean. 
Immaculate. 
Fluffy…
That’s a robot with a sentimental wrinkle in its program for you.
Since that time my attitude to executioners has somehow changed.
Maybe, I understood that nothing of theirs was alien to me.
Well, in nutshell, at that wedding I was a vegetarian.

As for the assertion that in the case of the fir tree it all was the guilt of the ax pressing me into slaughter of the innocent plant, there’s nothing new about it:
‘I was carrying out the orders...’
Zombie-simulation…)

In the fifth grade, we had a new teacher because our elementary education was over. 
The new teacher's name was Makarenko Lyubov … er… Alexeevna?. Antonovna?. 
I don’t remember her patronymic.
Between us, we called her just ‘Makar'. 
‘Atas! Makar is coming!' 
(In the school lingo ‘atas’ meant ‘beware’.)

But that was later and for the first time, I met the would-be class mistress the day before school, when Mom came with me to find out the curriculum and to get acquainted with my new teacher. 
The new teacher asked me to help her with the class wall newspaper on a big sheet of Whatman paper. 
It had to have a frame as marked with a pencil line five-centimeter offset from the edges.
She gave me a brush and a box of watercolors—but use only the blue one!—and went out together with my Mom to go on with their acquaintance.

Proud to be trusted with the job, I started immediately.
I dipped the brush in the glass of water, dampened the blue and began to paint the strip of the Whatman paper between its edge and the pencil mark trying not to trespass it. 
It turned to be an up-hill job – you paint, and paint, and paint and there still remains so much to paint yet.
And the main problem that the watercolor could not be laid uniformly – each stroke lighter or darker than another. 
But I persevered – not every day a boy is trusted with making frames on a sheet of Whatman. 

By return of Mom and the teacher, I had only painted a quarter of the frame. 
The teacher said at once that was enough even more than that because all she had wanted was that I just passed the brush along the pencil line, but now it's too late. 
Mom promised to bring a sheet of Whatman paper from her work, but the teacher said ‘no-no!’
I came up with a proposal to mount strips of paper on glue over the superfluously painted areas, but it was turned down I don’t know why.

We left and Mom did not rebuke me on our way home.
Actually, it's not my fault if the new teacher had never in her life seen a frame of plywood but only such as around the words of Marx and Lenin in the Regiment Club. 
When school began there was a wall newspaper in our classroom.
Probably, I was the only schoolboy who studied the paper’s blue frame for so long...

However, our new teacher still had some confidence in me because a month later she sent me to our former class with a verbal message to Seraphima Sergeevna.
I knocked on the familiar door and recited the message to my first teacher who was sitting at her desk facing a new growth of first graders.
She thanked me and asked to close the window leaf which let drought in when they opened the door.
I readily climbed onto the windowsill and, standing on it, reached out and slammed shut the vicious window leaf.
For coming back, instead of kneeling on the sill then lying on it with the stomach, I just jumped down on the floor. 
The jump turned out really deft and I strutted out of the silent classroom past the delight and reverence in the eyes of the small ones at their desks.

How could I have thought those first-graders on a visit to my kindergarten group were so unreachable grown up?
Arrogant swaggers!

And at home, we had already a TV set. 
The announcers read the news from it against the background of the Kremlin walls and towers, the hockey players rushed from one goal to the other at the European and World Championships. 
There were eagerly awaited for programs of Kinopanorama and the Club of Jolly and Inventive, and, of course, movies!
I would never have thought that there could be a film longer than of two sequels.
Four-sequel serial "Bombard the area I'm in!" became an eye-opener. 
Only I did not like Italian cinema because when Marcello Mastroianni talked about abortion and I asked what that word meant our neighbor aunt Polinna laughed and my Dad told me to go to the children's room – that movie was not for me... 

The arms race went on not only in TV news broadcasting but also in our boyish life.
We grew up to use the crook weaponry. 
Crook pistols, crook guns.
There’s any need for explanations what a slingshot is.
However, there are two types of slingshots: for shooting pebbles, and for shooting crooks. 

(...pebble-shooters are the mortal weapon, in the hungry post-war years in Stepanakert, the boys were knocking sparrows from the trees for their meal…) 

Crook-shooting slingshot is almost a toy made of aluminum wire and aircraft-model round rubber band (instead of rubber straps cut out from a gas mask).
Such slingshots are charged with small pieces of aluminum wire bent into narrow arcs – crooks.
Catch the rubber band into the crook, pull and let it fly.
The crook doesn't kill but it is felt alright. 
Bad news if it hits an eye. 

Now, if instead of the slingshot the round rubber band is fixed upon the planed piece of plank and the crook is pulled along the even surface, the accuracy of the hit is much greater because the released crook takes off the planed guide.
The rest is at your discretion – whether to cut out a submachine gun or a pistol from that piece of plank.
At the point on the plank to which the crook is pulled, you adjust the trigger from the same aluminum wire which is strung crosswise and keeps the crook in place until you pull the trigger.
The pressure for keeping originates from an underpants rubber stretched tightly between the trigger and the screw in the plank.

Those armed with such weapons do not run and cry ‘ta-ta-ta!’ as in the ‘War-Mommy’. 
Noup.
They go down into the basements and start to hunt with it each other in in the dark or semi-darkness. 
Metallic ‘dzink!’ of a crook against the cement floor or wall suggests that the enemy is near and opened fire at you.
But if you occupied the position in the pit above the floor at the end of the corridor, it’s almost an impregnable bunker.
You have just to sit there tight and send crooks to the sound of stealthy steps and if you hear ‘ouch!' from the dark then you have targeted him Okay. 

In autumn they finished construction of the five-story building across the road surrounding the Block.
The tenants were moving into their flats while deep down, in the endless basement corridors of so big a building (the first of that height and size at the Object) there unfolded unprecedented combat actions with employment of crook weapons of all types.
The underground basement was lit with rare electric bulbs but not for long: long-range crook shots burst them, up one by one, into fine splinters. 
Perhaps, the only drawback of the crook weapons was their almost complete noiselessness.
For real self-assertion, you need your arms to do some major bangs... 

Life does not stand still it just had to flow. 
Where to? 
The direction is decided by customer's wish expressed in their dreams. 

The evening quietude of the courtyard began more and more oftener get disrupt by sharp reports alike to firearms shots.
The boys had armed themselves with ‘peelikkalkas' and I, as usual, lagging behind the flow of social life had to unctuously inquire how to make a ‘peelikkalka'. 

15 cm length of a narrow (0.5 cm) copper tube is bent in the shape of letter ‘L’.
The foot of the ‘L' is flattened with a hammer. 
A small amount of molten lead is poured into the tube through the remaining orifice to form a smooth leaden bottom at the bend point.
Find a thick long nail reaching the leaden bottom and still sticking out from the tube for at least 5 cm.
Bend the nail at 4 cm from its head (you’ve got another ‘L’ now).
Insert the nail into the tube (the contraption resembles the left bracket ‘[‘, or right bracket ‘]', depending on your point of view) and as a result, you have a working piston-cylinder system. 
Connect the bent nail head and the flattened tube foot by means of an underpants rubber band; the whole construction looks like a small bow and your ‘peelikkalka is ready.
Pull the nail halfway from the tube, the tension of the band forces the nail rest against the copper wall of the tube at the point to which you pulled the nail out. 
Squeeze the ‘peelikkalka in your palm, the band pressed to the tube makes the nail slide inside and sharply hit the leaden bottom.
A blank shot is done. 
It remains only to load the firearms for which purpose the nail is fully taken out and the tube loaded with scrapings of sulfur from a pair of matches heads. 
Insert the nail back, cock it up with the band and ‘Hello, world!’ with a live shot from your weapon.
Bang!
In the dark of evening, a splash of flame shoots out from the tube. 
On the whole, it's the same principle as in toy pistols with paper pistons but with the much more impressive result. 

After learning theory, I wanted to make a 'peelikkalka' of my own but Dad did not have a copper tube of the right size at his work.
Yet and still I had it. 
Probably, one of the boys gave me an odd one of his.

Yes, being a schoolboy you get a real schooling for life…

And at school, our class was moved to a one-story building in the lower part of the school grounds, about a hundred meters from the main school building. 
Apart from our classroom, there was only workshop room for Handicraft lessons with rows of vices and even a lathe. 
But that room was rarely open, two or three days a week. 

Learning at the outskirts of the school grounds had lots of advantages.
During the breaks you could have mad runs in the corridor without the risk of stumbling into a teacher – they were patrolling only the main building.
The teachers entered our class after our sentinel posted at the building corner would announce which subject was heading to us from up there.
The look-out guard was the must to not be caught at bullying the socket on the classroom wall.
We thrust the legs of radio-electronic resistances into the holes of the mains.
In the resulting short circuit, the melting resistance spat indignantly with large sparks of flame. 

(...now I'm just wondering why none of us had ever got electroshocked. 
Perhaps, it was a very kind wall socket in that room…)

There were changes in our house too.
The Zimin family had left because Stepan Zimin was made redundant.
Nikita Khrushchev, when being the main ruler of the USSR, promised the West to cut the contingent of the Soviet Army to meager twenty million of servicemen. 
Soon after that, he was made to retire but the new ruler kept the promise of the previous one.
The reduction of personnel touched even the Object.

In addition to the Zimins, the tenants from the apartment beneath us also left. 
Their grown-up daughter Julia left us, three children from the upper floor, her album with the collection of matchbox stickers.
At those times matchboxes were made not of cardboard with printed pictures on it but of very thin one-layer plywood.
The matchbox then was cover with thin blue paper and on top of it, they mounted a sticker with Ulanova the ballet dancer, or some sea animal, or the portrait of an astronaut. 
People collected matchbox stickers just like the post stamps.
Only first, they should be peeled off a box soaked in water and then, of course, dried. 

Julia's collection was subdivided into sections: sports, aviation, Hero Cities, and so on. 
Of course, we three were delighted with so generous a gift and continued the collection... 

Instead of Yura Zimin another Yura became my friend and with another second name.
Yura Nikolaenko was also a neighbor but more distant – not from the same landing, yet from the same courtyard.
As the snow filled the forest we went there to search for foxholes, or at least to catch a hare.
We had good chances for the success because together with us went a 'lowlander' boy who lived in a wooden house and had a dog.
He yanked the reluctant dog with a linen rope tied at its collar.
In the forest, though, the dog started to drag him forward and backward over the snowdrifts with lots of hare footprints.
Yura and I were running behind not to miss out on the moment of catching a hare. 
Then we noticed that the dog was paying no attention to the hare footprints but constantly sniffing for something else.
Finally, it started to dig a high snow drift. 
Anticipating that it would dig out a fox burrow, we armed ourselves with sticks against the beast.
However, from under the snow, the dog pulled out a big old bone and we stopped hunting...

During the winter holidays, many children of my age were invited to a neighboring corner house in the courtyard where some newly arrived tenants celebrated the birthday of their daughter, my future classmate. 
She looked like Malvina from the Golden Key tale, only her hair was not blue and curly but straight.
At the table, the beautiful girl shared her memories that at the place where they lived before she was the Queen of the Courtyard and the boys thereof were her, sort of, pages... 
