~~~ My Universities. Part Two ~~~ 

That was exactly what I dreamed about, or rather did not allow myself to dream of in all those two years – that in the morning I would wake up not from the nasal roar of the on-duty idiot but from a female embrace, that of Olga.
She came home from work, lay atop of me, hugged through the blanket and I woke up and answered her kiss.

Our talk somehow did not come out well if an exchange of monosyllabic words could be called talk at all. 
And we looked at each other in such a way that my mother, who was on her vacation, took our daughter Lenochka and went to the Bazaar.

Everything in life is really repeating itself. 
What was, that will be again.
The difference is only in details, in the accompanying facts.
For example, that my mother returned from the Bazaar (and not from the store) without oranges, and that nothing restrained me this time.

As for hieroglyphics left on my wrist by the claws of a hotel sadist, Olga, sure thing, took notice of them, attentively studied and read their message, but not out loud. 
Well, I did not insist on her sharing the obtained information. 

(...there is nothing more elastic than time.
The current year lasts without an end or edge; a year lived through turns just a point in time. 
A point has no length – it does not even begin.
Anything shorter than a year is not considered having even a point’s worth.
What can you say about the last month?
That it had several Fridays and one thirteenth.
And about the last hour?
Oh, yes! It was sixty minutes.
Empty juggling with numbers and terms. 
A decade is a no bigger point. 
After that point spent at school, a person begins to grow bristles. 
If the same point has been spent in the zone – the joints ache (especially in the right shoulder) but all the same it’s just a point…)

A week after the demobilization, the two-year eternity of the construction battalion became just scraps of memories pinned to a point in the past. 
The flow of the very same life takes all those points to hell or someplace else and it does not matter where because you have to go on further with the flow of the life-stream. 

When bathing, there are two ways of entering the water.
With the first you go in the water step by step, pulling your shoulders up, rising on tiptoes cautiously as the bottom grew deeper...
The other way is going until it's knee-deep and with a shout (or without it) plunge headlong forward.

It was time to plunge into my civilian life.

Master Borya Sakoon died and did not fulfill his promise to retire.

The Arkhipenkos moved to the Kamchatka Peninsular, that’s the fishermen’s paradise place.

My brother and sister graduated from the Railway Transportation School and were sent to pay for their diplomas by working in the exploration and construction of railways somewhere in the Urals between Ufa and Orenburg.

Vladya and Chuba returned from the army half a year before me and had time enough to get used to the concurrent life-stream. 
Skully had developed a solid bold patch over his head and was looking forward to becoming twenty-seven – the end of the draft liability age.
He was exempted from the army as an only breadwinner for his single mother, God save her until his twenty-seven-year-old! 

My re-appearance at the Konotop polite society did not amuse me much. 
We gathered at the Vlady’s, I stuffed a joint but my friends did but a couple of drags each, out of mere politeness.
From there we made for the Loony where the Spitzes were playing dances in the park. 
When passing the Store 6, Vladya farted at a lighted match that Skully brought to his behind.
The emitted ammonia flared up in a blue bunch of flame.
It did not really delight me.
In the construction battalion, I had seen all sorts of like tricks and I did not want unwelcome recollections. 
In general, my way of getting on high wasn't fine with them, and theirs didn't turn me on. 
We remained friends but in the course of our following lives, we streamed, basically, in different currents...

I borrowed The Adventures of Captain Blood from the Club library but couldn't read even a half of it – rubbish. 
And once it had been my regular thrill.
‘What do you keep in the newspaper on top the wardrobe?' asked Olga. 
‘A spike condom. Wanna try?’
‘No!’
Though I, in fact, suspected she had checked it before asking.
Or was I overestimating her?

She introduced me to an unknown squirt in the common stream – her co-worker from the brick factory who we met near the Store 1.
A mujik over thirty. 
He said his name, I answered with mine and we immediately forgot what had just heard.
I did not like his smile baring the over-worn gums receded to the teeth roots.
Besides, some uneasiness about him made it clear that the meeting and new acquaintance was not a good news to him.
I regretted we had come up to him at all.

And at the other side of the Under-Overpass, near the Store 5, it was already we to be approached by a half-acquaintance Halimonenko, aka Halimon.
He demanded of Olga a separate talk.
She asked me to wait and walked with him four meters aside on the same two-step porch in front of the store.
Some scraps of words ‘militia’, ‘get not a little’ came to me.
It’s unpleasant to stand pushed aside that way, but so I was asked.

(...another of my pesky traits is doing what I have been asked to without giving it a thought and starting to think when it’s too late…)

Their conversation ended and she returned to me followed by his owner-like ‘I told you!' in her back. 
Olga explained that someone had tried to steal his motorcycle from the shed and he mistakenly decided she had anything to do with all that. 

(...myths are different.
There are useful ones, like the myths of ancient Greece, and useless – as if the army turns young men into manly men.
Bullshit!
Were it so, I’d say to Halimon,
‘This is my woman, talk to me!’
It’s not that I was afraid of him, it’s just that it never occurred to me to say so.
The army hadn’t made a man of me…)

Olga suggested going to the Plant Park on Saturday, where the Pesnedary group from Bakhmach were playing dances. 
It took half an hour by a local train in the Kiev direction to get from Konotop to Bakhmach. 
What kind of group could be from such a backwater?
Olga said they still played well and she would also introduce me to Valentin Batrak, aka Lyalka, the brother of Vitya Batrak, aka Slave.

The Pesnedary sounded very good thanks to their keyboard player – a long guy in the hairstyle of Angela Devis.
‘Smoke on the Water’ by the Deep Purple and ‘Mexico’ by the Chicago band they did quite decently.
Then Lyalka approached and Olga introduced us.

Tall and skinny, with the long fair hair, slightly cocked up atop of the head, he sported a nail-like beard a la Cardinal Richelieu, of the same shade.
Just one look at each other’s enlightened eyes said us that we needed a more secluded place that the dance-floor.

We found such a place, exchanged the credentials and reached consensus in the estimation of the sampled grass quality, and established relations of friendship and cooperation for the coming years...

My father disclosed his strategic plans for implementing my army skills.
His project called for the addition one more room and a veranda to the semi-hutta they had bought, as well as paneling its walls with brick from outside and, at the same breath, construction of a brick shed in the yard.
The shed would be of two sections – one for winter fuel and the second residential, like, summer room.

I felt reluctant to clarify that at the military service my training was concentrated exclusively on using shovel and breaker.
Not that I was ashamed of the fact, but because of he was so happy to start realization of his designs, I couldn't tell him that ‘bricklayer' in my military ID was a complete bullshit.
So I said, yes, of course, no problems. 

A truckload of bricks was brought from the brick factory, a truckload of sand, a half ton of cement and – off went the construction works of the century!

The water source was further away than in the Nezhin Street, besides, the running water system hadn't reached the outskirts of the Settlement and water had to be extracted from a hell-deep well by spinning the crank of a thick tube shaft to wind on it the multi-meter chain until the tin pail of water on its end came up to the daylight. 

That summer was really hot, both in weather and the labor heat. 
The father’s plans became a tangible reality.
The quality?
Well, the seams in masonry are thicker than ideal, but the plumb-line test of jambs and corners still do not make me blush.

 On his arrival home, a dembel had to report to the Military Commissar wearing the parade-crap and get registered there.
 After those proceedings I sent the parcel with the uniform to its owner in the military detachment 41769, thrusting a three-rouble bank-note in the jacket's inner pocket. 
Had the money arrived?

My mother told she also had been putting three rubles in each of her letters to me. 
Couldn’t she have mentioned that at least one time?!
I would have written not to do so because I was receiving just the vanilla letters.
Well, they also were my relief, of course...

Soon after, I received a letter from Stavropol sent by the soldier-clerk at the Staff barracks of the VSO-11.
He did not write a single line, but, as it was arranged between us, put in the envelope a blank sheet of paper with the stamp of the Construction Battalion.
It only remained to fill the page with the testimonial for admission to an institute.

I prepared a text depicting myself very positively as an excellent soldier both at military and political training, and an active participant in the amateur art activities of the battalion, a reliable comrade, an experienced warrior of the Soviet armed forces in general and the military troops in particular. 
Not only zampolits could do the job, after all.

I asked my father to re-write the text on the sheet with the stamp since his handwriting looked more like that of an inveterate officer. 

He copied the list of my virtues, but a bit hesitated at signing the testimonial,
‘What if they catch you?’
I assured him that the Battalion Commander did not recognize his signature himself due to the chronically leaky memory.
Grateful for my valiant labor that summer, my father scribbled a signature (any colonel would be proud of such a one) nearby the seal of the military detachment 41769.

I did not go to Kiev, but, on the advice of my mother, took my papers to the Nezhin State Pedagogical Institute which also had the English Language Department. 
It took only a two-hour ride by a local train to get to Nezhin and I did not care for the institute's pedagogical quirk, most importantly, I would be able to read in English.

For the period of the entrance examinations I, as an applicant was allocated a bed in the hostel in the main square of the Nezhin City opposite the white Lenin statue and the massive building of the City and District Party Committee (two in one) behind his back.

It took one bus stop from the square to the institute was at the next, but on foot much faster.

The English Department was located on the third floor of the Old Building, erected in the times of Decemberists by Count Razumovsky and already in those times of yore, it served as the educational institution for nondescript students along with Gogol, the great Russian writer. 
For that fact, the institution had nailed down to its name the name of N. V. Gogol too. 

I liked the short alley of giant birch-trees in front of the high porch of the Old Building and the wide white columns carrying its pediment, the echoing corridors paved with parquet and high auditorium rooms.
And I liked the Dean of the English Department, named Antonyuk.

Probably, I liked him for not picking holes in my lame knowledge of English.
I do not think he would be as lenient if knowing that my grandfather's name was Joseph, and my father-in-law was Abram. 

Dean Antonyuk was a type of militant anti-Semite.
In dark evenings Antonyuk sneakily crossed with his indignant pencil the names of the teachers of Jewish nationality marked in the time-table of the English Department and in the same manner purged the faculty wall-newspaper hanging by. 
Like a youth from an underground resistance struggling gegen Anzeigen of the occupational authorities of the Third Reich.

But Alexander Bliznyuk, one of the Jewish instructors, as alert as Gestapo, tracked Antonyuk down and caught him red-handed for which the latter lost his position.
However, that happened later.

At the written examination on Russian, I turned out a composition evaluated with ‘good’.
In fact, that was an untraceable plagiarism – an adaptation of the memorable message-statement which Zoya Ilynichna, the teacher of Russian language and literature at the Konotop School 13, rolled out in red ink under my subversive composition about meditations by the window.

And at the oral examination, I luckily took the ticket with the task to describe the character of Prince Andrey from the ‘War and Peace' by Tolstoi. 
However, the examiner took a try at setting me back with an additional question:
‘Tell us some poem of a Soviet poet, anyone of your choice.’
That was, as you call it, a question below the belt, but I recollected that Yesenin also lived for some time under the Soviet regime and began to recite with a restaurant drawl:
‘Oh, my leafless maple,
Ice-coated maple...' 

On the second verse he surrendered and I got a passing score.

In the interval between the exams, I bought a couple of balloons for Lenochka. 
In the trading net of Konotop, these goods appeared too rarely and I did not like her playing with an old suitcase which she preferred to the pair of worn out dolls of hers. 
She pulled  the suitcase out of the bedroom in the middle of the kitchen and announced:
‘Cry, Grandma! Grandpa, cry! Lenochka is leaving for the BAM!’

It was about a year already that the Central TV news program ‘Time’ each evening presented reports of labor achievements at the construction of the railway track of the Baikal-Amur Mainline, aka BAM.

‘Come to me at the BAM,
And we'll have it on the rails,
I’m not a stuck-up ma’am...’

I did not like that the child was growing too over-politicized, and remembered how on the Object we loved to play balloons.

And so, lying in the evening on the hostel cot, I smoked and the cigarette smoke swam up to the ceiling and, with nothing better to do, prompted me to conduct an experiment in physics.
By its behavior that smoke clearly demonstrated that it was lighter than the air.
Now, if we had a balloon filled with smoke the balloon had to fly!
It remained only to solve the technical problem of how to get the smoke into the balloon.

Life experience came to the rescue.
The stoners had a way of brotherly assistance to each other ensuring a swift lift high as a kite, the trick code-named ‘locomotive’.
One of bro took a sparked joint with the burning end into his mouth, observing, of course, precautions as not to get burnt, and blew.
As a result, a dense thick smoke was pouring from the tube-mouthpiece of the Belomor-Canal cigarette and immediately consumed by the other stoner.
But for a balloon a straight cigarette would also do, right?

I lit it, inserted the mouthpiece into the balloon neck, and blew from the other end a lungful of air.

However, let's not forget, that the ‘locomotive' smoke gets swallowed by the consumer, whereas the air encased in a balloon escapes the rubber body through its neck. 
In short, the amount of the smoke-mixed air that I had blown in burst back through the mouthpiece and knocked the smoldering tobacco out, straight into my throat.

(...’when a dog has nothing to do, he licks his balls’ my father used to say.
Sometimes it's better to lick than tamper with aeronautics…) 

Sure enough, I coughed the tobacco out, but its fire burned my larynx somewhere behind the glands.
That’s what happens when a philologist meddles with physics matters.
First, it hurts, and secondly, go to pharmacies in search of furacilin for treating burns. 

(...but the most hurting, hurting to tears, that even this experience could not prevent my future follies.
Certain morons are not able to learn from their own experience because of it is not possible to foresee which other locomotives with balls will enter my inquisitive head tomorrow…)

I was enrolled as a first-year student, but the triumphant departure to Konotop was somewhat clouded by having words with the commandant of the hostel.
He found a shortage of one pane in the window of my room.
The glass had been missing even when I move in there, but the jackass did not except any explanations demanding retribution in ready money or finding a workman who would insert the pane.
I did not have the amount indicated and I resented the injustice of the ripping-off.
When left alone in the room, I went up to the upper floor and pulled the glass from the window in the toilet.
The size fitted perfectly.
How I love standardization!

The commandant, however, found fault that the glass had obviously been in use.
I justified myself by buying it on hands in the bazaar, where I did not notice the traces of paint along the edges...

Olga did not like the whole idea of my getting a higher education, especially for the profession of a teacher.
She did not consider English as a specialty at all.
Everyone nowadays should know the language, so she was told by a baby doctor once called to treat Lenochka's cold. 
I responded by calling the doctor dirty smartie and the promise to come to Konotop each Saturday.
She stopped carping but demanded my submission to her wish of dying my hair with hydrogen peroxide.

That's why in the all-out picture of the 1975 first-year students at the English Department of the Nezhin State Pedagogical Institute, aka NGPI, I look as it befits the Hero of our Time – a blond with a dark mustache...

Our course was divided into four groups of twelve students each with only one male among them.
Exactly the same male-female percentage ratio was maintained at all the courses of the English Department.

Because of my being a dyed blond, some local youth with intonations of the boy from Nalchik started to show his close attention.
Shocked by a vivid sample of the construction battalion parlance, he left me alone but tragically announced that his life was broken – he didn’t go to Moscow because of me, though he could.

Olga immediately informed me that I was hanging out with gays in Nezhin.
On my demand to indicate the source of the falsehood, she mentioned a certain Shoorik whose sister studied at the Mathematics Department of the NGPI.

At my request, Lyalka called Shoorik out of the dance-floor into a dark alley to have a talk with me.
I hit the summoned Shoorik on the jaw and he ran away.
I didn’t pursue but only shouted after him in the construction battalion manner:
‘Come here, fucker!’
A strange way to bring a runaway back, if you come to think about it...

The classes in the Old Building lasted from nine to almost three and then I went along the wide asphalt path towards the New Building tiled with sandstone.
In front of it stretched a row of thick sprawling willows hiding under their canopies long benches without backrest.
In thirty meters from the New Building's corner lumped the red-brick five-story block of the student hostel, the Hosty. 

Opposite the hostel there stood a tall two-story canteen in a cubes-and-glass style.
The large hall on the second floor was filled with a crowd of square four-person tables, and the babel of students' voices, with the swish of water in the dishwasher, the clatter of kitchen utensils, the knock of plates with chosen havvage against the plastic trays, which were dragged over narrow rails along the kitchen towards the woman seated at the checkout counter in the end of the rail-path in the  white rigid tube of cloth upon her head.
The order of nuns-cashiers.

A fleeting glance at the tray contents and the cashier read the verdict—from 60 kop. to 1 ruble, accepted the payment, gave the change and clicked the next check from her clanging box to add it to a heap of the same paper scraps.

At times some students with a quirk for research took the same set of food while in different places of the moving line – just so, from purely scientific curiosity. 
The cost of such control sets varied.
The cashier created the price on the fly, by inspiration, taking into account the client's appearance, the weather conditions outside and the level of noise in the hall. 

After finishing their meal, visitors went to the first floor past the shortest embodiment of human wisdom E = mc2, inscribed on the wall of the staircase landing.
An empty stomach makes one deaf to learning, as a Russian proverb runs, and after the meal, the theory of relativity might turn more comprehensible, you never can say.

(…by the by, it’s a moot point who’s wiser – Einstein or the guy that had found such a correct place for application of his formula…)

On the first floor, there was the eternally locked hall of celebrations, where weddings were held twice a year. 

Going out onto the high porch you could still turn into a glass door of a small confectionery with two saleswomen in nun whites and the usual assortment of sand cakes for 22 kop., two-day-old donuts and tobacco products.
Cigarettes were not too good – on a dampish side, except for ‘Belomor-Canal' of the most excellent quality – dry, stuffed with pliable tobacco fiber, which is very important. 
Once, being on high, I demanded from the saleswomen ‘The Ledger of Complaints and Proposals’ and scribbled thanks to this account, ending with the words ‘be blessed, dearest dears!’
A graphomaniac would always find occasion to give vent to his hidden passion.

Now you could return to the five-story Hosty.
On the two-step porch at the entrance three columns of wide-section iron pipes supported the flat concrete canopy.
Each of the pipes, when hit against, produced a different tone.
You could play on them ‘do-re-mi-do-re-do!’, so precise were the pitch intervals issued by the iron pipes.

There was the Department of Music Teachers at the NGPI, but the honor of that musical discovery belonged to a student of English Department who graduated before my enrollment.
As for the musical phrase itself, it was an old-time curse among the laboohs.
Wherever you played it any labooh that happened around would clearly understand that you were saying:
‘Go and fuck your ass-hole!’
One syllable for each note.

Behind the glazed entrance door, there was a small transparent vestibule with the next door into the lobby. 

In the corner on the right, the desk of the on-duty watchwoman stood under the square shield of plywood fixed on the wall and studded with rows of nails for hanging the keys to the rooms of the Hosty. 
If the nail under the written in ink number 72 was empty that meant one of my roommates was in the room together with the key.

In the long corridor behind the lobby you could turn to the right or to the left to reach the staircases to the upper floors, but the left one was the shorter route to room 72.

The floors were divided between the departments, aka faculties.
The second floor was inhabited by the students of Biology Department, aka biofac.
English Department, aka anglofac, possessed the third floor. 
Mathematicians from phizmat lived on the fourth floor, and the uppermost—fifth—floor belonged to Music-Pedagogical Department, aka muzped. 

On any floor from the staircase landing, you entered a long half-dark corridor. 
The light got into it from two windows at the opposite ends of the corridor, each one from the floor to the ceiling.
The rest of the scenery was made of walls with closed doors above the dark gray ground concrete of the floor.
Room 72 was next to the washroom of six sinks by the corridor window.
The door to the men’s toilet was on the other side of the same window.

On the opposite end of the long corridor everything was exactly the same, only the toilet there was for the ladies.

On entering the room you got into the narrowest part of it squeezed between the four plywood lockers up to the ceiling—two of them from each side.
After the lockers, the room became a bit wider, with a bed, a cabinet-box, and another bed under the walls on both sides. 
The wide, three-winged window was right ahead with two more cabinet-boxes under its sill.
 
The center of the room was occupied by a dark brown table with four chairs pushed under it – otherwise, you couldn't go to the window. 

The soiled and partly tattered wallpaper hid the walls.
The round tin box in the center of the white-through-dust ceiling contained the light bulb.
There also were two wall sockets and the switch by the door.

However, from midnight till six in the morning the electricity in the rooms was turned off by the on-duty watchwoman with the switch by the lobby on the first floor.

For those eager to gnaw the granite of the science there was a reading room on the first floor next to the hall with a TV box.
In both the electricity was in place all night through.
However, the reading room got empty long before the midnight and the hall with the TV as well, unless an international football match or a new television movie with Andrey Mironov were broadcast.

