
She sat under the same apple tree, leaned her back on the trunk and smiled at me her inviting sweet smile.
I was amazed by the exact coincidence of circumstances – a garden around her and me under the apple tree, and only the serpent was skipping the picture.
And with tender emotion, I started to think of Eera and to be proud of my being faithful to her. 
Because of I restrained myself from falling in the usual groove with the blonde and did not go with the flow despite all so ingratiating conditions created for the purpose – the bed of hay in the apple-tree shade in the Garden of Eden.

The following morning I, the chief engineer and a long tape measure were marking out where to lay the wall of two inspection holes in the boxes under the construction. 
Tshombe had come up with something to keep us busy with.

A couple of days before the completion of the term at the construction platoon, Sasha Chalov popped up at the Auto-Depot 4 on no particular purpose just to drink the sun in the tumbler.
Giving a light shake to his briefcase he, as was his custom, recited his favorite quatrain:

‘One won’t sound at all
And two won’t jingle this way
When people of such quality
Live in the Soviet land!’

From the poetry standpoint, it was a rather poor and lousy piece of it yet, on the whole, containing an optimistically inspiring message.

The stoker-’chemists’ helped to sort out with the contents of the portfolio, which made one bottle for a snout and, after the consumption, Sasha Chalov left.

It was already late so Tomato and Yura also steered to their stoker-house, but on the way, they knocked on the door of the girls' room. 
It happened to be locked.
They knocked again and then recollecting their happy school days and themselves – adolescent hooligans – they started cutting capers around the locked door.
They burnt shreds of paper and shoved them under the door.
The girls defended themselves from inside with the water from their kettle. 

In the background was I lying on my bed and producing a soundtrack of hue and cry. 
A sudden rage against the whole female gender broke out in me, like, because of them all was so awry and so boring that I myself did not know what I needed.
So I lay there yelling most disgusting things.

If the door were open from the very beginning the ‘chemists’ would simply come in and go out, but now they were burning with hunting ardor.

Sure thing, staying under the sword of Damocles of being sent back to the zone they were not going to aggravate the situation, they were just having fun.

However, the poor girls in the besieged room were not up to all these logical operations or seeing any fun at all when a pair of convicts were attacking their door under my instigating idiotic yells from the common bedroom:
‘Bitches! Wolf whores!’
Finally, one of the guys from their course came to my bed and said that was not right. 
I shouted to the stokers that that was enough and Tomato with Yura immediately disappeared. 
The ‘chemists’ had no problems with the logic.

The next morning I knocked on the door of the girls' room. 
It was not locked.
I entered and apologized for the previous night.
‘Afraid of getting kicked out from the institute?’ asked the one with the brown hair.
Hardly would she believe that I was just ashamed.
Even less I could bring it over that I myself did not know whether I was afraid or wanted to be sent down from it.

(...looking back brings not too much fun, because of too often temptation to spit in your own face.
However, the truth remains truth only when it's unvarnished and all that shit is also me…) 

Since I earned some kopecks at the student construction platoon, I bought a doll for Lenochka.
Of course, I wouldn't be smart enough to do it but the radio station Mayak for at least thrice a day aired the most popular hit of the season: 

‘Daddy present me,
Daddy present me,
Daddy present me
With a doll!’

And during a day that hit would get you someplace or another and start to twirl on and on in the brains even without the radio around until – click! – hey, that’s an idea!
So I went to Department Store to buy a doll, but there were no dolls.

It wouldn’t be right to always find faults with the era of shortages.
It’s not era’s fault if ideas reach the retarded dolt belatedly.
So I had to buy a dog.
Also the most expensive and of the biggest size, no less than a meter tall, in his trousers and a shirt.
The same, practically, doll, only with a canine head...

Lenochka grew a healthy child and she attended the big kindergarten ‘Sunny’ not too far from home, in the apple orchard of May Day Street.

All September I was taking her to ‘Sunny' and coming after her at the end of the day because those who worked at the student construction platoon were released from the patronizing assistance to collective farms. 
I shaved my beard but left the hair long.
Once I and my brother went to dances together.
Sasha Basha had already replaced the Spitzes at the Loony dance-floor.

My brother had served his two years in the army at the Baikonur cosmodrome and for that, he lost any chance of going out of the country for twenty years. 
Even visiting the resorts of socialist Bulgaria became impossible, what if he suddenly would disclose there that on Baikonur, besides the astronauts, all kinds of test ballistic missiles were launched on a weekly basis?

When we went to the Loony I, besides the long hair, wore sunglasses with ‘mona-Lisa' rim. 
You don't need sunglasses in the evening, but the thin golden ‘mona-Lisa' rim was considered the pop symbol of a dude of fashion. 
Just like the jeans that were losing blue dye of their fabric with wear.
Such jeans were pushed over for 120-150 rubles, which was more than an average workman salary.
The jeans had been trafficking into Konotop by dark-skinned Algerians who studied at the Engineering Technical School. 

Those Algerians were so naive.
‘He said-a come-a go out and talk-a. I come-a out, he kick-a me a kick. Why-a?' 
But for all their naivety they kept the price of jeans high. 

And my jeans were for just 30 rubles and that they looked.
Some Brazilian crap never fading with washing, nothing like Lyalka’s ‘Levi’s’.
Therefore, although it’s hard to see through sunglasses in the evening, they justified themselves at dances, covering the misery in jeans.

To the dance-floor, we arrived after the break when it was filled with the crowd to the utmost. 
My brother went looking for his girlfriend and I pulled up nearby the stage and remained there listening.
Basha’s guitarist, Marik, was good at solo breaks.
Then some buster came up and stared at me.
Well, understandable – such a hippy-long hair, the 'mona-Lisa', and the metropolitan air. 
So he stared for a while and got lost.
I stood where I was and in a couple of minutes–good evening to your hutta!–the same buster popped up but already with his buddy. 
And they approached me and, synchronously so, rocked back and–lo!–two fists flew into me.

I parried them with my shoulder but the collective impact of the double blow felled me and I, like, flew into another space.
I mean that – a completely another dimension, as if under the water.
The sound of the dances instantly turned off and I flew on, or rather, I kept spinning along the concrete floor.
And from all the sides legs were rushing towards me all too eager to kick.
And those legs, for some reason, were not whole but sort of cutouts, just from feet up to knees.
So they whizzed by from here and there only soundlessly.
But missed kicking.
I yanked me up and jumped on the bench by the circular fence with my back to the pipes.
Then the sound came back.
The girls’ shrieking and Basha’s into the microphone:
‘Friends, please, observe...’
And before the bench a group of guys facing me and one of them, such hefty, shouts:
‘Who’re you? Who’re you? Take off your glasses!!’
I pulled the ‘mona-Lisa’ off and someone shouted:
‘From the Orpheuses!’
They turned out to be guys from the Settlement, although I did not even know them.
They took me in a tight circle and escorted out of the dance-floor and went back at once to the general sorting out.
On that day the guys from the Depot Street tried to prove that Loony was their territory.

At the exit from the park, I met my brother, one his brow was broken. 
We had to go to the Station for him to wash the blood off under the tap in the men’s room...

Seeing the most conspicuous things is the hardest of tasks.
I had been raiding grass plantations as far as the Kandybino itself while in the neighbor’s garden, right over the fence there grew a dense corpse of cannabis.
That’s what a limited outlook means.
I was looking into the distance and couldn’t see under my very nose.
 The situation called for a restoration of the historical justice.

I did it the next night and to cover the tracks threw the grass from the neighbor’s garden over his fence to the next lane and then round the corner to our wicket and up to the shed’s attic.
Sampling proved that the quality was simply excellent.
I shared some of the booties with Lyalka for him to get high and feel that not for nothing he was warming me up in those two years...

You strike a lode and there comes another.
In Nezhin, in the plot by an inconspicuous hutta in the Count’s Park across the Leninist Komsomol cinema there stood five ample bushes of the grass without any fencing whatsoever.
No saint would pass by and withstand the temptation.
But then a serious problem arose how to store the harvest?
To keep it under the bed in Hosty?
Very funny indeed.

I walked around the hostel looking for a suitable nook but in vain. 
Then in the washroom on the fourth floor, I saw a desk with a drawer. 
I did not know how it came to be there or for how long it would stay in the washroom, but being desperate to find any better place (I couldn't just leave the weed in the park with the rains setting in, couldn't I?) I just heaped it in the drawer. 
As a precaution, I turned the desk around and pushed it against the wall so that no one would horse around.
Then, as necessary, I was visiting the washroom to pinch off the grass for a day or two of consumption...

My course-mates returned from the collective farm they patronized in a complete shock.
So tacitly deep in thoughts about the meaning and aim of life.
That is, whether or not they understood those issues correctly?

It turned out that during the patronizing assistance works two of local guys had a knife fight.
Because of whom?
Because of Tanya that was studying in my group.

A year before those ruthless bitches of my group-mates asked me to pretend that I fell in love with her.
Just for fun because she was so inarticulate and unattractive.
And I—the stupid moose—was quick to do what asked.

‘Tanya! I love you with all of the depth! And what is your mutual feeling?’
For two days I pestered her at the break until she asked to leave her alone.
It looked like she was ready to cry.
I got ashamed and pissed off.

Well, now, how do you like it, ladies?
Who was chosen by the guys as the prize of their berserk passion?

That’s why the girls were following her with the looks full of respect and envy.
And she walked the corridors so solemn and thoughtful as if she got it something about herself which she could never expect.
And her glances at me became not as negating as they used to be.
What if I had not been just sporting last year?
Thank you, dagger guys, for the alibi...

But I still kept bothered with the incorrect way of storing the grass in the desk drawer.
Anyone with advanced notions would at once get the smell in the washroom. 
Then again, the Phys-Mat Department students could ask themselves the unnecessary question: why did I start so frequently visit the washroom on their floor? 
So with the first snow in November I took it out to transfer to another place of storage.
My plan was to hide it in the dormer on the Old Building’s roof because I saw a well-welded ladder going there from the backyard...

Late in the evening Slavic, Twoic, and Eera accompanied me to the Old Building's backyard like being a state commission at the launch of a manned spaceship from the site at Baikonur. 
I gave my coat and hat to Eera, thrust the package with the grass under my shirt and started. 

The first minutes of the ladder-lift went in normal mode.
The vibration of the construction parts did not exceed the limits but only the iron rungs were icy cold and the lift was endless.
At the times of Gogol, they built the floors two-three times taller than presently. 

At the entering the roof, there cropped up unforeseen problems. 
The ladder did not reach the roof itself ending under the eaves.
It was necessary to clutch the tinplate and go over its edge onto the roof.

Of that moment I recollect the uncompromisingly dark night around.
There were three of us – the tin, the darkness and I...
The roof itself was quite slippery although not too steep
I had to move on stepping onto the standing seams of the sheet blocks.
When I got to the dormer its window turned out to be tightly sealed with thick planks nailed from within.
Thank you for your visit.

On the way back I suddenly slipped when nearing the place where I had to get over the tin roof edge but I did not fall, straightened up and said through the clenched teeth:
‘Impressing the public, you bastard?’

Then I went down on all fours, dangled my legs over the edge and groped with my feet for the ladder rung.
On the way down I was mortified at the thought that it wouldn’t be bad if I just fell but if on someone from the commission?

(...certain thoughts are better never to be thought at all…)

And again I kicked in a door.
What is remarkable it was the same one.
Only Ilya Lipes did not live in that room anymore. 
It was inhabited by the current four-year students and Vitya Kononevich among them who thoughtlessly asked Zhora Ilchenko for ‘The Godfather’ book together with the dictionary by Hornby imported from India.

What insignificant, at first glance, and trivial things might cause a jolt in the life flow!
Say, you ask Zhora to lend you ‘The Godfather' for a month or so and then you come to the hostel and see the door of your room has got kicked in. 

By the way, this time no shaky finger were observed.
The skills get formed really quickly.
Perhaps, the fact that I was working not for Veerich but for myself had its effect.

‘The Godfather’ novel by Mario Puzo was stolen not out of idle curiosity (would or wouldn’t my finger start shaking?), neither for upgrading my door-kick-in skills, but just to translate it in Russian.

The novel, as also its author, happened to be rather thick, about four hundred pages.
Taking into consideration the way it had got to my hands, Konotop was a more suitable place for plunging into the translation work.
It took several months of intent labor to render the book from the Penguin Publishing House into a pile of thick numbered notebooks written with my handwriting, in different hues of ink, in Russian.
I passed the whole bunch to Lyalka and his wife Valentina for reading but of the subsequent movements and general fate of the rendered Godfather I am aware no more than of that of the Jaws, also rendered from English.

In the course of the work, about halfway through towards the completion, my father cooperated by sharing his critical remarks.

In the original, there was a description of a party in the Hollywood club designed and equipped for the recreation of movie stars. 
I had difficulties with translating the American English term ‘blowjob’ into Russian.
The descriptive options seemed too long for me while the shorter ones looked outrageously obscene.
 When in labor pains, I tore an unsuccessful attempt at translation out of the notebook and shoved it into the stove to be used for kindling.

In the evening my father opened the cast-iron door to fill the stove firebox with wood, took out the crumpled sheet of paper and on reading through its contents asked:
‘What fucking hooey is this?’

I did not challenge his estimation for two reasons.
Firstly, I knew that passages perceived in the form of the printed text as eroticism do look a vulgar porn when presented in handwriting.
It suffices to recall the handwritten story passing in a thin notebook from hands to hands of the senior students at Konotop school 13. 
The story contained a passage running as follows ‘...she threw her legs in fishnet lace up over his shoulders...’
I do not know why but I had immediately and inseparably associated those fishnet legs with the Eiffel Tower.
It’s not an easy task to defend erotica with the Eiffel Tower crushing poor guy’s shoulders.
On the other hand, it's hard to predict how those same legs would have affected me were they met in an orderly line of a typographic set. 
People judge by appearances.

Secondly, I always respected the subtle literary instinct of my father.
Thus, from the newspaper ‘Trud’ he read only the TV program and giving the other headings a brief glance announced the exhaustive conclusion:
‘Neither rhyme nor reason – kiss a flea in the brick.' 
And he never mistook.
Crisp and to the point.

Besides, he possessed some amazing linguistic ingenuity.
Perhaps, because of his Ryazan roots.
The land of Ryazan always lay at the crossroads of language contacts.

Well, for example.
With his gray brows taunted above the plastic rim of his glasses, he's busy with some kind of handwork at the kitchen table. 
Inserting some hooey into another hooey.
I pass between the table and the stove from the door to the window, then from the window to the door.
Without taking his eyes from the hooeys in his hands the father says:
‘Why trorting?’
No dictionary has got the word.
But what a juicy verb!
How much of elastic plasticity it contains!
The most accurate grasp of the action’s essence and the state of the actor.
And most importantly, the word got born spontaneously, just now, while this flicking hooey doesn’t want to enter into the other flicking one.
‘Who'd not trort? The treppa's pibzed already!’
Both workpieces drop from his hands on the table. 
A long look over the rim of his glasses.
Then he says:
‘Pfui!’

And here, by the way, lies the complete explanation of the 'fathers-and-children' problem – they produce the likes of themselves and then say ‘pfui!’

(...coming back to ‘The Godfather’.
Unfortunately, there remained no writers in the American literature – Salinger, Carver, Pearson and the list is at its end.
The rest are scribbling with their both eyes on Hollywood buying their production.
Compilers of cartoon stories and soap opera dialogues.

Look at the Briton Maugham, the very first paragraph in a story by him is a chord, a fugue tuning up.
In the first paragraph, among the surface details, he scatters nodules, which will develop into the further narrative and the denouement that echoes the first paragraph.
That’s a real craftsmanship.
Exactly what the Hollywood jackleg daysmen are lacking.
My father would say:
‘Pfui!’

Puzo is the role model from the same and for the same Hollywood writers.
He was the first to get a six-figure sum of dollars for his creation, the accountancy pathfinder, but ‘The Godfather’ of his suffers from the infirmity common to all the action bestsellers: while the protagonists fight for their survival in the unfavorable environment of hostile mafia clans, you can still read it, but with the start of the elephant distribution, that is methodical extermination of bad guys who were stupid enough to give a chance to their future killers, the interest dwindles rapidly and soon evaporates.
The same trouble as with the 19th song in the Odyssey, when the hero returns home from his wanderings and whacks the suitors of his wife one by one with aesthetic relishing of the details in what manner the assholes’ brains were smashed of guts ripped out.
I couldn't finish reading the song even in a good Ukrainian translation, not because of squeamishness but simply got bored…) 

I noticed him a fraction of second sooner than he saw me.
With our stares merged we were nearing each other along the sidewalk by the building of the Trade Union of the Railroad Distance. 
Both of us knew that only one would survive.
Or no one.
With my lateral sight, I marked the figures of rare passers-by scared and careful to avoid the space on one line between him and me. 
Steadily, inexorably we were shortening the line. 
Step by step.
The distance dwindled rendering the forthcoming duel inescapably lethal.
His hand darted to his right hip but no sooner than his palm touched the handle of his Smith & Wesson my Colt erupted in a series of shots fused into a thundering staccato. 
If you are going to survive in Konotop you have to swing up your gun first. 
His hands flushed up to his bullet-riddled chest. 
He staggered and crouched over a line of short shorn bushes of the lawn upon which he had to fall the next moment.

I put my Colt back in the holster, he straightened up and we embraced.
‘Kuba!’
‘Gray!’

The passers-by were getting along past us.
Yes, that’s him – Kuba.
Grinning with the gold which has replaced his teeth lost in the bars of faraway ports of oversea wanderings, but this is Kuba. 
‘How do you?’
It’s strange that everybody changes—they grow fat, they grow bald—but for your friends.
Once your eyes contact that’s enough, you no longer see scars, or false teeth or any other distracting things.
You see you friend Kuba with whom you have had bike rides to the Kandybino or the Seim, attended the Children Sector, rode tram 'sausage'.
It just that now Kuba has something to tell about the life of seamen plowing the World Ocean.
