
We are sitting at Kuba’s.
His old folks are at work but there we have three eggs in the frying pan on the table by the three-liter jar with transparent, lethally powerful moonshine where the lemon peels float not below the middle.
We drink, eat and listen to the stories of Kuba the Seafarer.

Once he was late after the vacation and his ship sailed away.
They assigned him to a self-propelled barge for about a month until some suitable ship turned up.
The crew consisted of him alone, but he strictly kept the maritime regulations on the barge moored at the far wharf at the mouth of the river. 
Standing on the bridge he shouted loudly:
‘Cast off!’
And he ran from the bridge to the wharf and removed the lines from the bitts.
Then he jumped back to command and execute ‘Slow Astern!’

Well done!
Let them know ours! 
Up the elbows!

And in foreign ports, there are special houses for seamen recreation. 
Equipped like a luxury hotel, with a restaurant, rooms, a swimming pool.
So with Soviet seamen diving into the pool there at once pop up some crimson spots in the water around them.
Abroad, they got advanced and add some chemicals to the water and it turns crimson from urine.
Well, and you know the habit of ours, the first thing after plunging into water is to take a leak… 
So they have to drain the pool and fill it again and the Germans sit for an hour at the tables over their beer and wait.
‘Rusishe Schweinen!’
They themselves are pigs. Fascists unwhacked!
Up the elbows!

In Hong Kong, it was, or maybe Thailand. 
Ours got moored, went to the city and then they were coming back to the pier. 
There was a team of dockers, so skinny them all because they live on just rice and seafood. 
Our boatswain was a hero, two meters tall, he grabbed one of the dockers by his collar and lifted up in the air like a kitten. 
‘Yea, bro. Slaving all your life, eh? Not right.’
He put him back and went on.
So that yellow did not understand the brotherly solidarity and did not appreciate the Slavic breadth of soul.
He ran ahead, jumped into the air—ya!—and kicked the boatswain into the nose. 
Then ours had a whole hour to water the boatswain on the pier to bring him back to life. 
And dat's rightee! 
Here’s to Bruce Lee!
Up the!

No, Kuba ain’t gonna get married at all.
But they all are fucking sluts.
A ship in the roadstead ready for sailing off.
The captain’s wife comes up on a towboat to kiss him goodbye.
Happy voyage, dear!
Coming back to the harbor she’s fucking the helmsman and two mechanics in turn in the wheelhouse.
For freedom!
For whores!
Up-p-p!

And it’s difficult to smuggle goods from abroad.
Any ship’s zampolit has at least two finks among the crew.
‘You mean, there are zampolits on ships?!’
‘That’s the rule.’
‘I’d better stay a land rat then!’
T’s rightee!
For rats!
U-u-up!

But I remembered clearly that I was going to the drugstore because my mother asked to bring her somewhat medicine before I go to Nezhin.
Therefore, I most warmly said goodbye to Kuba the Sea Dog although the lemon peels were not yet scraping along the bottom of the three-liter jar and in the frying pan were glittering, here and there, some spots of sunflower not wiped out dry with bread. 
‘No! No! I know! All's gonna be nyshtyak' 

After the Under-Overpass, I boarded a tram to the center. 
I clearly got off it at the Department Store and went around its corner to the drugstore where, by my mother's lead, they sold the needed medicine. 
I entered the glass door, reached the glass partition and, to the question of the woman in white, breathed the air in preparing to answer when I suddenly realized that even if I could remember the name of the medication then pronouncing it or anything at all was a deed beyond the humanly possible.
With bitter regret I turned around, exhaled and went out brokenly.

Nevertheless, I somehow managed to cross the Peace Square before realizing that I was done in beyond all bounds and switched to the guidance of the guardian angel. 
He steered me into the yard of a five-story apartment block, chose the proper entrance and took care that I did not crash down the dark stairs in an unfamiliar basement. 
Then he led me along an endless cemented corridor to the place where the scattered light from the opening to the outside pit outlined a mesh bed frame leaned against the wall.
It remained only to lower it to the floor and fall onto it.
The sheepskin coat and the hat served as a sleeping bag.

I woke up in a stiff state but still managed to get to the last train to Nezhin.
The next weekend I again volunteered to go to the drugstore after the medicine if my mother reminded me its name but she said no, it was not necessary any longer... 

There was a New Year dancing party held in the foyer of the New Building.
Eera and I were dancing there and some teacher from the Biology Department got delighted and told us that we were created for each other.
It’s nice to hear such things especially from a specialist versed in species.

But then my jeans zipper went burst.
The length of my sweater was not enough to hide the hole.
So I tried to fasten the sweater hem to the jean’s fly with the safety pin lent me by Slavic.
It did not solve the issue because the pinched down sweater resembled a leotard for girls and I felt anxious that the pin would go open and prick into the right or the left ball if not in the dick.
I had to go to Hosty and change my jeans.

Normally, I didn't keep spare clothes in my room changing in Konotop at weekends.
However, that was a special occasion and I had brought elegant jeans for dancing at the party.
Now I changed back into shabbier, but sturdier ones.

Upon returning to the foyer I found Eera in an eager conversation with some young man.
I did not like him right away, despite the fact that he was some of her old acquaintances.
Probably, I couldn’t hide my dislike towards him and it got reflected.
The confrontation did not go over to active hostilities but the voice timbers acquired menacing pitch. 

At some point, I got distracted from the jackass and caught a glimpse of Eera which deeply amazed me. 
She blossomed with happiness.
Never have I ever seen so much joy in her eyes.

On the way to her home, she kept disparaging the incorrectness of my reaction to an absolutely normal situation and I half-heartedly defended myself busy with storing in my head the new discovery. 

(…a woman is a female bitch for which the moment of the highest bliss is when two males are going to measure their horns for her sake.
For her, for the prize she-mate.
That’s it.
You are slaving like a Pygmalion turning a statue into living flesh, plowing like Papa Carlo, and then someone else comes to enjoy the ready. 
Where’s the f-f.. flicking justice?..)

The New Year Eera met at the Hosty.
Before her arrival, I served a romantic table for two and then suddenly decided to prepare a surprise for her, or rather a New Year gift...

I had been always taught to think that the longer, the better.
That means that duration of having sex indicates the action's quality. 

The human race invented quite a few ways to improve the quality. 
The simplest one is to kill a glass or two, I mean the standard Russian glass of 250 ml.
However, stepping on that path you need the right snack.
Prosper Merimé, for example, highly recommends soup of cock combs for this particular purpose.
I did not even have lard.

The circumstances called for going another way and seeking other means. 
The personal experience of the brute facts of life insistingly prompted that of two go-rounds the second having sex was always longer.
I had no other choice but having a pre-emptive sex.
Very conveniently, Plyama was running along the corridor, hither and thither.

I did not start to explain her the whole background of my unexpected interest in her or clarify that I needed her solely for the purposes of technical assistance.
Although such frankness would not hurt her in any way.
She had seen much more than I could imagine in the wildest dreams before she had to transfer to Nezhin Pedagogical Institute from the University of Kiev to avoid being sent down for over-grossly unleashed fucking. 
Maybe there were other reasons too because she casually mentioned that her husband did not wear anything under his jeans at all.
Well, I don’t know, for me, an unspoiled guy from the Plant Settlement, all that was a bit too complicated...

The technical assistance was applied in a neutral, of course, room and orogenitally but, alas, to no avail.
Perhaps, because of her warning not to crumple her breasts, she did not have erogenous zones there at all. 
And even the ringlets of her hair the color of the raven’s wing and the glasses which she never took off were of no help.

But what a subtle plan it had been!
And what a willingness for selfless self-sacrifice!
Really, when you think of it.
What can be a more vivid prove of love and care than providing a blowjob for Plyama, who had no idea where those f-f.. fugitive erogenous zones of hers were at all. 

But I did not tell Eera what I had to undergo to make her feel good.
I have never been in the habit of emphasizing my positive aspects or advertising my noble deeds...

Later on, that New Year night, when Eera and I sat up at the table again wrapped in bed sheets like Romans in togas, Plyama walked by the door opened to the corridor. 
Out there, noisily and joyfully, those who met the New Year in the hostel congratulated each other.
Plyama politely knocked on the door jamb, was invited to the table, treated to wine and allowed to ask Eera about her life circumstances.

Eera started to drive a fool to her as if she was a married woman but her husband being a geologist seldom came home. 
Plyama, who had recently moved from Kiev to Nezhin, believed everything making Eera and me laugh immoderately.
The arrogant, naive Romans in loose togas, we were having the fun of the gullible Plyama not knowing that any jest is the truth which has simply not come yet to be fulfilled... 

The winter examination session ended and Eera and I visited Borzna for the wedding of her girlfriend Vera and a solid groom in the rank of major.
Unlike to the first wedding I experienced in Borzna, the party was not at home but in the large cafe-canteen on the main square of the district center and lasted for two days.
After the first day, Eera and I spent the night in a small hutta among the snow-covered vegetable gardens on the outskirts. 

The hutta owner, a distant relative of Vera, was told that Eera and I were a newlywed married couple and she after having her fill at the wedding table went to stay for the night at some other relative’s because her hutta consisted of just one room filled with a whitewashed oven, a table, and a bed.

The bed stood by the wide window sill crossed with contrasting black shadows from the frame under the bright full moon outside setting on gleam the glass of the empty three-liter jar left on the same sill.
I liked everything there, and the earth floor made of firm washed down clay, and the bed with boards instead of a mesh, and the mattress unevenly stuffed with hay...

It is unlikely that the mistress believed in our being a husband and wife, during the wedding feast I a couple of times caught her both sneering and encouraging gaze from behind the table where she sat among the elderly women in formal black padded jackets or black plush coats with thick plaid kerchiefs spread over their shoulders...

We threw our clothes off on a chair and a stool and ascended to the matrimonial bed as it was a hundred and two hundred years before in the same huttas lost among the same snowdrifts.
The moon reluctantly rose up from the window frame and could no longer follow the merrymaking couple of newlyweds pressing hay at the different ends of the bed grown into the earth floor of the ancient hutta...

On the second day, Eera got silly jealous when a local beauty summoned me from the wedding hall. 
I did not really get it what’s what when Vera’s brother, Mozart by his handle, retold the unintelligible message.
Leaving the cafe-canteen I went to the backyard where a beautiful, in general, female was staging a pathetic hysteria on trampled snow in the hands of two girlfriends, all the trinity in light dresses. 
A group of young spectators who came out into the air crowded by with exhortations to her and advises to the girls pinioning her.
Without the slightest participation in the happening I turned to go and met the unforgiving stare of Eera. 
At the table, I had a hard time convincing her that I had nothing to do with the tipsy girl's vagaries. 

I was supported by an ample-bodied Valentina sitting next to Eera, a female of most remarkable physique.
Further on was seated an insignificant by her mighty forms Armenian.
His Armenian identity was revealed when he was giving us a ride in the twilight.

On the street leading to the Moscow highway, the big Valentina told him to slow down and left the Zhiguli to yell at Tolik, her fifth-grader son. 
The boy was replying to his mother in pure Ukrainian and I felt somehow knocked out of a rut by the winter snow around sharply contrasting with his Negro face.

Later, Eera told me that Valentina had born Tolik after working as a waitress in Kiev, or may be found that job after the delivery, I'm not sure on that point. 

Valentina's current life partner of an Armenian was not messing around with the instance of upbringing. 
We rode along the highway and in a couple of kilometers stopped on the roadside snow.
The driver turned on the tape-recorder and took out a bottle of foil-necked champagne.

(...the beauty of Armenian music does not open to listeners right away.
At that time it was still incomprehensible to me but I kept patient – he, who gives a ride, orders the music…)

A patrol car stopped on the road and two militiamen in greatcoats and, despite the winter, forage caps approached the Zhiguli.
The Armenian stepped out to negotiate and make it clear that everything was safe.

In the meantime, Valentina started to resent that I and Eera were staying in so shabby a hutta and undertook to bring her indignation to the bride’s parents, who were some kind of her relatives.
As a result, the second night we spent in a large, well-equipped hutta in the well-to-do part of Borzna.

The moon could peep into our room there, only a dim reflection of the moonlight made its way to us through the glazed door of the adjacent veranda.
The bed frame was too creaky so the mattress had to be thrown on the painted floorboards.
Not bad, in general, but I liked it batter in the shabby hutta...

We were taken to Nezhin by the Armenian.
Along the way, I for some reason was thinking about Tolik, the Negro boy. 
Old women in Borzna were dropping their jaws and crossing themselves behind his back.
How does it feel that you are not like anyone else?

(...Pushkin's grandfather was an unalloyed Ethiopian, but at least in his childhood, he had seen normal people…) 

When we got out of the Zhiguli by the hostel, the Armenian asked me to tarry a second and when Eera went along he inquired if I knew the address of the beauty with theatrical traits.
I neither knew nor wanted to know it.

Eera and I went to the room on the third floor and after half hour of rolling on a more habitual bed frame, she said she felt something she had never experienced before. 
Well, thank you!
So it was not in vain, putting myself out all that year and a half. 
Or was it that she had just pitied me?.

As mentioned already, in February I went to the hospital for more than a week because of my adherence to principles.
After a week of treatment, my sister Natasha found me there. 
In the whole Decemberists Street in Konotop, there was just one phone in the hutta at number 26.
I did not know their number and even if I did, I probably wouldn’t call.
One and a half weeks are not two years.

I left the wardroom with Natasha and at the end of the corridor, we went down one flight of the stairs leading to the basement. 
She took out her filter cigarettes, I stuffed a joint in a Belomor-Canal and we mixed our smokes.
‘Well, and how are you?’asked my sister after I reported how Pill went crazy.
‘Well, and I also have Eera,’ said I and started to convince my sister that Eera was not like everyone else, not at all.
‘Well, well,’ replied Natasha indefinitely...

When I was discharged, I suddenly felt that too much strength had been given to the struggle for the just cause.
On the way to the hostel, I even had to untie the ear-flaps of my rabbit fur hat and let them loose. 
In the most severe frost I never did so and only rubbed my ears against the turned up collar of the sheepskin coat and demanded from the saleswoman at the station stand to sell me a bottle of frostbitten beer and, despite her exhortations, drank it in small sips through the narrowing ring of ice setting inside the bottle neck.
And now?
You could hardly put your finger on anything more deteriorating our health conditions than hospitals...

Spring came and I was approached by Vitya from the Musical Department.
The one with ancient Roman curls of short blonde hair on his head to whom I in the first year was lending my guitar and who gave me the key to the vacant room on the fifth floor.
Now he came up with a request on behalf of his friend Volodya.
But why did not he talk for himself?
After all, we were together in the United mus-ped and anlofac CJI team and took the honorable third place out of three.
Well, he, like, was shy.
In general, his wife got pregnant and now he had to give blood for the abortion, but he himself was still in the middle of the treatment.
Tripper, see?
Yeah, clear. Of course, I’d do it for him, no problem.
It’s they who gave the key to our love affair with Nadya.
A glass of blood is such a trifle in spring.
And Nadya was worthy of much more than that... 

Men toilet on the third floor of the hostel besides serving its direct purpose was also forcing the student body to wake up from amorphous hibernation.
A mass interested in leaflets is not amorphous any longer. 
However, the most ardent KGBist, with all their rats could not gain a promotion on the ground of headlines from the central press cut out and glued in the toilet for all to see.
At the same time, having appeared on the inside of a booth door, those headings suddenly acquired a certain hidden meaning and forced to look at them from a different angle, not envisaged by the editorial staff of the party publishing organ.
Squatting over the potty, one started to perceive another perspective of the quite ordinary and everyday: 

'Care of Party Has to Be Answered

Chain is Strong by its Links

Same 45 Minutes Again

Quality is the Priority

By Accelerated Schedule

No Amnesty to Bunglers

In the Name of Peace and Prosperity'

The toilet humor spilled from the booths over the tiled wall with two urinals.
I, as usual, sped past the first with the title:

'Waters of North to Flow South'

and pulled up by the second with two headings:

'Biathlon Sport for Courageous

Communism Our Aim'

I finished taking the leak and suddenly felt a strange burning sensation.
Looking down I watched as an unknown murky drop crawled lazily out of the urethra slot.
I froze.
What?
No! It cannot be!

But no pleading could cancel the fact that three days before due to a stupid confluence of circumstances the moment they switched off the light in the hostel rooms there was no one in mine except for a four-year student whom I laid on the nearest bed. 
Purely mechanically.
The reflex worked.
She had never appealed to me, as it's said already – some stupid coincidence.
And with her, I felt no more than the Lucy Mancini's partners from ‘The Godfather' before she was operated on by Dr. Kennedy's surgeon friend. 
Like in a church bell...

Itching and burning did not stop.
All polygamy had to be canceled for an indefinite period.
Twoic advised me to consult with Dr. Grisha.

Doctor ponderously shook his head and admitted that several cases of gonorrhea infection had already been recorded in the hostel.
What f-f.. flicking gonorrhea?
Yes. The symptoms were very similar but to know for sure we needed a laboratory analysis of the semen.
What the f-f.. freak!
But I did not know how to do it, I had never masturbated in my life.
Dr. Grisha volunteered to help.

We locked ourselves in one of the rooms – he, I and Sveta, well, just in case, like, sort of auxiliary contingent.
From his large soft briefcase, Grisha angled a cork sealed glass tube and passed to me to collect the material for analysis. 
I dropped my jeans and underpants knee-deep and sat on a chair for the procedure at hand.
Grisha got seated on the bed opposite, Sveta next to him.
He began to drive my foreskin up and down.
All three of us in earnest tense attention stared at the protruding dick on which Grisha’s hand was rushing blurry with the rapidness of the motion.

After a couple of minutes, Grisha started to swallow his saliva and excitedly announced that the penis was too dry and needed to get moistened. 
I felt gratitude to Sveta for her presence; at least some deterrent.
And I said it’s Okay, never mind, now I knew the way and would try it myself, only I had to take the test tube with me, Okay?

I zipped up my jeans and Grisha gave me a good remedy from his resourceful briefcase, a certain Rifadin in capsules... 

Mindful of Maria’s promise to cure me in case of S.T.D., I called her and she told me to come that evening.
When I explained to her that I had gonorrhea and needed to extract the semen for analysis she opened the bed and started to undress. 
I again explained to her that I had gonorrhea, but she said it did not matter.

Then I also started to undress but warned that I would collect the semen into the test tube. 
She agreed.
Probably, that her coil spring protected not only from pregnancy but from gonorrhea as well.
Only I put the test tube on the nightstand by the radio and we proceeded.
