
Thais of Athens treated Alexander the Great with some medicine so that they could have it all night long.

I cannot state that all my night with Maria I had an incessant erection.
After another and another of her regular ‘More! Mo-re!’ we rested and then proceeded again because I couldn’t cum until the dawn came sipping in throw the window panes.
Maybe I was restrained by the presence of the uncorked test tube?
I do not know, I am not an expert.

In the broad morning light, I joined her ‘More! I want it! A!' with the grunts of my own and jerked out. 
‘No! No!’ screamed she. ‘In me!’
But it was too late.

With the sense of done duty, I cummed into the laboratory test tube and slammed it shut tightly.
Maria obviously did not like it but so was the arrangement...

Perfectly happy with the accomplishment, I hurried to Dr. Grisha and proudly presented the moisture jailed (with so much a-do) behind the glass.
He took off his white doctor’s gown, grabbed the large soft briefcase and we left his office.

That briefcase could have been seen in different places of Nezhin on that day, accompanied by the passionate roll of Dr. Grisha's buttocks on one side and my disturbed gait of a depressed moose on the other. 
The test tube made the constant fourth to the company, hiding in the back pocket of my jeans with the still unchecked semen.

It seemed that Grisha wanted to help in earnest.
Only the day turned out to be such that venereal dispensary did not work, in some laboratory someone left for somewhere else, in another they had run out of something and so on.
About two in the afternoon our harmonious four (Grisha, briefcase, I and the tube) appeared for some reason at the station and decided that it was enough: all the symptoms matched without any further checking.

I threw the test tube into a gray tubular garbage urn near the large white bust of Lenin put halfway between the station and the high platform for local trains of the Kiev destination.
And the urn itself stood between that bust and the red-and-yellow telephone booth in its oil-paint coat by the corner of the luggage warehouse.
Throwing the tube away was a bit of a plaintive act, like, we were not complete strangers anymore after going together through all we had to after our first meeting, however, there was no good reason to carry it on any further... 

I went to Hosty and then returned to the station.
The week was over and I needed to show up in Konotop so that my parents would not worry.
There were still ten minutes before the local train to Konotop and all of a sudden I was just pulled to pay a visit to the bust of Lenin.
What I saw there literally dumbfounded me.

From the circular orifice of the gray urn, green pliant shoots stuck uncontrollably up. 
I did not immediately get it that while I was away they trimmed the bushes around the pedestal with the bust. 
The train came up and pacing across the platform to the car I looked back to give the urn the last and proud glance – bushes or no bushes but that f-f.. frivolous semen had real vigor in it!
When, of course, abstracting from some unnecessary details...

Rifadin from Grisha imparted a very vivid color to my urine and that’s all.
Thanks to the capsules I pissed with the cheerfully scarlet and, overcoming itching and burning, cursed my stupid incontinence with Lucy Mancini. 

Maria treacherously washed her hands of me as if offended that I preferred some glass tube to her natural vase...

I got cured by Eera.
She simply led me to an elderly woman in a barracks-like children hospital. 
The woman in white took me behind a screen in the corridor to hide from the looks of the queue.
I downed my pants a little, bent forward a little bit, got a shot in my buttock, and…
And that’s all.
Nothing more was required.
And summer came.

How I spent summer.
Like any other decent, diligent, work-loving boy. 
First of all, I became a plant breeder.

Among the beds dug up at the end of the garden on Decemberists 13, there started to grow and strengthen vigorous shoots of cannabis.
The seeds were taken from the booty bushes looted from the neighbor.
Although it seems unjust to call them ‘bushes’.
They looked more like sprouting seedlings of young trees.
The trees were growing like one united family, rushing upwards, turning into a dense thicket, which, of course, needed to be thinned out in the course of selection culling.
From the street, that thicket was not visible screened by the fruit trees, but you cannot hide anything from the neighbors. 

The neighbor on the right asked my mother about the purpose of the cultivated crop.
My mother replied, that hemp produced a lot of seeds (such small, round, oily looking ones) and at the Bazaar the canary keepers were simply scrambling for those seeds to feed their feathered singers.

Oh, how ingenious mother’s love is!
I would never in my life have thought of driving such a fool!
Most likely, I’d give out some stuff about compresses and foot baths from varicose veins aggravated by the deposition of salts.

And that would be a dangerous mistake because in the Plant Settlement nobody kept canaries but there were plenty of labor veterans with deteriorated health.
So what?
Then how's about an honored vet having a loving teenager relative who's ready to give half of his night sleep for a remedy from Grandpa's ailings that grow not too far away?.
Okay, let’s drop spooking ourselves with nightmares.
Anyway, excessive advertising might damage the business growth.

And, by the by, the question was asked by the wife of the robbed neighbor who, in addition to his pension, had also a job of a watchman in the nearby Track Machine Station, aka PMS.

(...and it’s not my fault that the organization’s name in Russian, when abbreviated, coincides with that of Premenstrual Syndrome…)

I did not have many scruples about expropriating his cannabis because after the raid there was left enough of it to keep him to the following season. 

(...it's only now, in retrospect, I think of a possibility that he could have his clients with canaries…) 

By that time, several years had already passed since my mother left the KEMZ Plant and got a job in the RepBase pre-assembly unit.
I gather it, they were checking the availability of helicopter spare parts there. 
Physically her job was not exhausting and on returning home after a day’s work she often shared news about the relationships in the collective of only women except for the unit chief and his deputy.
At work, she played the role of a conflict-extinguisher and amused herself by playing compliments. 
That is, after telling someone another of a pleasantness she scored herself a point.

(...it calls for a good self-schooling and close self-control not to wallow in the repetition of what had been already said…) 

Sometimes the chief of the unit would shake his head and say,
‘That's a cunning she-Jew for you! Found again how to lick!' 
And my mother laughed in return with joy, and she laughed at home retelling the compliment that brought her one more point...

My brother Sasha worked at the PMS in a team of repairers.
They went to change the sleepers on the railway tracks and ram the rocks beneath them with a massive dildo-type vibrator.
He was the only worker there who had technical education in the specifical railway field... 

Our sister Natasha, while there was no work for her, was taking my daughter Lenochka to the kindergarten and back. 

At the request of my father in the personnel department of the RepBase, they gave me a temporary job, until the end of the summer, at the construction shop there.
With three permanent workmen of RepBase, I was demolishing and building somewhat walls within its grounds. 
The most difficult part of the job was waiting until the mortar would be brought for us to work. 
I earned a fig, a fig and one more fig there but then the work was just to sit and sit, or stand up and stand on.
Anyway, the RepBase was obviously happy with my masonry.

With nothing better to do, I again grew a beard and the RepBase workmen baptized me as Fidel Castro. 
My father liked it maybe because he and Fidel were born in the same year.
When I had nothing to smoke, I went to beg from my father.
He worked as a locksmith in the shop with strict regulations about smoking which only was allowed in specially designated places, like an open gazebo in the yard. 

My father was respected on the shop floor for his golden hands and readiness to show how it was done.

When you see a botcher tormenting himself and spoiling the material to produce a throwaway you can laugh quietly and go on your way.
My father was not like that, he couldn’t tolerate illiteracy.
He would stand aside with a painful cringe in his face, then come up, take the instrument from the guy and show how.
‘See? Less convoluted than beat boiling.’
That’s why he was respected and they did not take offense when he muttered:
‘Really have to do it askew? Taught so, eh?’

Many workers of RepBase came there from the nearby village of Popovka and were never trained in the ‘seminary’.

Popovka had integrated with the RepBase so closely that in the village you could see fences made of helicopter blades. 
Discarded, of course.
But the blade wound up to the stake with a piece of wire looks ugly and fixing it with a neat binding as suggested by uncle Kolya was completely another kettle of fish... 

In the unpaneled half of the hutta at Decemberists 13 resided auntie Zina, a lonely pensioner.
She plaited her half-gray hair into stringy maiden braids and tied them together.
On the porch at her door for the most of the year hung a yellow dried circular braid of interwoven onions.
Auntie Zina did not interfere with the life of the yard and smiled at everyone.
In spring, following the directive of our father, my brother and I were turning the dirt in her part of the garden.
Once she was very friendly with Olga and harbored resentment of my role in our divorce, but she still kept smiling even at me... 

There was enough living space in our brick-paneled half-hutta of three rooms and a kitchen plus veranda, apart from the summer room in the yard under one roof with the shed.
Among the inhabitants of all that area, only five-year-old Lenochka was not smoking. 
The rest of us smoked ‘Belomor-Canal’ for 22 kopecks except for Natasha with her filtered ‘Metropolitan’ for 40 kopecks.
She once counted up that the family total expenditure for cigarettes was 25-30 rubles monthly...

The summer was over and before my first departure to the fourth course of English Department, my mother asked if I could bring and introduce to her Eera from Nezhin. 
She knew about Eera from Natasha’s report and subsequent questions to me.
She had even seen Eera on the general photograph from the Borzna wedding.

The picture was taken in the photo studio of the district center, where the guests and relatives of the bride and groom stood in three rows on the long benches of descending height behind the happy pair in the chairs.
My mother asked me to show who from the multitude was Eera and I answered:
‘Find her yourself.’

In the picture I stood in the upper row on the right surrounded by three girls and Eera was in the diagonally opposite corner. 
My mother’s finger touched her face.
‘That’s her?’
I felt that she for some reason would rather be mistaken, but I couldn't lie to my mother. 
‘How d’you guess?’
‘I don’t know.’

(...the first prosaic work in Ukrainian was ‘The Witch of Konotop’ written by Kvitka-Osnovyanenko in 1833.
Ask whoever you choose ‘why?’ and they will answer:
‘I don’t know.’…)

Therefore, in September following the serene summer of 1977 the acquaintance of your mother and grandmother took place at Decemberists 13.

Of course, I had been bringing Eera to Konotop even before that and introduced her to the life of the local upper circle.
We visited the Loony where in honor of her visit there was demonstration gladiatorial performance on the floor. 
I even had, just in case, to block her off with myself nearby the stage.

Then Lyalka led us to his sidekick’s who in his treasure box made of human skull kept a quality grass ‘the cripple’, named so after its source.
The sidekick lived on the fourth floor with his cat whom at times he grabbed and hurled against anything at all.
Not everyone tames their pet with tenderness.
But at night he sometimes woke up from the gentle touch of her fangs to his Adam’s apple.
She did not bite the skin through and just made it clear who rules the ball at night...

When we were about to leave, Eera discovered the loss of her gloves.
The sidekick swore he had not seen any.
I, burning with shame, began to speculate about the gloves being forgotten at the Loony but Lyalka insisted on continuing the search until they were found behind the floor mirror in the hallway.
These cats are sometimes worse than the gang of forty thieves.

In the staircase there naturally was no light and I walked first groping for the steps with my feet and did not even hold onto the railing.
Like the brave tin soldier or the one-eyed leader in the gang of the blind from ‘Eulenspiegel' movie, because in the pitch dark I had Eera's hand on my shoulder and Lyalka was holding on hers. 
So we descended.

At that Eera's visit, we spent the night at Skully's who had already become an Acceptee and lived in a fairly spacey hutta where two ‘Jawa' bikes stood in the garage – one for him and the other for his wife's younger brother. 
Eera and I were left in a separate bedroom and going out Skully and his wife significantly hung a terry towel on the back of the bed.
When we lay down and from the radio ‘Spidola’ sounded the introduction to my favorite ‘Since I’m loving you’ by The Led Zeppelin I realized that nothing better could be provided even by Las Vegas...

At another occasion, we even visited Decemberists 13, at the daytime, naturally, when there was no one there. 
After champagne and a joint, we grew so playful that auntie Zina got funky in her place and began to tap at the front door. 
The sounds reaching her through the partition wall made her think of a bloody murder...

Eera met my brother and sister at the Loony and she knew Lenochka unilaterally by the pictures from the photo session around Rabentus dovecot which I had pasted on the wallpaper over my bed in the hostel.

Apart from Eera who came to Konotop to meet my parents I also took Slavic along.
He and my sister measured each other with guarded looks but didn't sniff. 
And that was correct because I brought Slavic for another purpose – I needed him to put on the alert. 

(...’the most powerful force is the force of habit’ or something like that was said by V. I. Lenin in one of his works in 58 volumes, and, quoting the Whites Colonel from the movie ‘Chapaev’:
‘Yes, here the Bolshevik leader is right.’…)

Consider, for instance, me.
I had got an ample plantation of hemp to keep me lavishly up to the following season even for the tail-falling Slavic and Twoic.
On the other hand, I was in the habit of plundering other folk's plantations.

Who’ll bite the dust – sound reason or deep-rooted habit?
Make bets, gentlemen!

(...it’s sometimes hard refuting Leninist theses…)

And what else, apart from the habit, smashes all chop-logic reasoning?
What drives us on and further on? 
What pushes to the new, the unknown?

Hope – what if the luck would have it?
Faith – but there should be, there is somewhere!. 
And Love, of course, the love of knowledge and change… 

All the summer going by tram along May Day Street I kept track of the growth stages of hemp in Batyuk's hutta yard and hoped, believed and dreamed – what if it were the same sort as the one that Rabentus shared with me for the deeper comprehension of the Scnar's lecture?. 

Once upon a time, Batyuk was a legend and role model for the youth not only of the Plant Settlement but the whole city. 

Everyone knew Batyuk who did not care a damn for the State Auto Inspection, aka GAI, and all the militia in the bargain.
They just couldn’t catch up with him to fine for riding his bike without a helmet wearing only his long windblown hair.
What? Drunk?
You first catch up and check it!

Two patrols ambushed him in the Zelenchuk area so he jumped his ‘Jawa’ between the poplars and shoot away along one of the tram rails.
The word ‘biker’ plodded to Konotop much later – we had Batyuk...

And suddenly thundered the news that shook the boys like the Tower of Babel – Batyuk died!

‘Bullshit! Alive, but in the reanimation.’

And the speed was a mere 60 kph, well, plus that of the counter-moving bus whose radiator Batyuk rammed with his head that chanced to have a helmet at the moment.
‘Got it, guys? The helmet is a good idea, so they do not need to scratch your brains off things after, the crap remains in the helmet neat and tidy.' 

Batyuk survived, only his mug remained checkered after the restoration.
They took the motorcycle from him together with the license and never gave back.
In protest, he became bald and got some jack job. 
In short, Batyuk was no more a legend.

However, he bought a scooter.
He made a candy of it – the windshield, rear-view mirrors, all kinds of pendants there.
The saddle was covered with fleece, long and white.
And (what was characteristic) he never rode his scooter without a helmet on his head.
A biker’s helmet, and also white to match the fleece under his ass...

And now let’s reflect on a natural situation – I go to bomb his hemp and he suddenly pops out: how could I know what’s still left under that white helmet?
So I brought Slavic too since there was enough of space. 

When it got dark we two went out.

‘Once we went to do our job, me and Rabinovich...’

Before our departure, Eera got very nervous and asked to lock her up in the summer room. 
‘What’s the problem? Lock the door from inside.’
‘No! You do it.’
Well, I locked the door from outside and gave the key back through the window because I did not know when we were going to return.

(...there’s still a lot of things that I will never understand…)

When we returned with the pillage Eera checked it.
No! She did not even smoke cigarettes but could determine the grass quality by sniffing at it.
With the accuracy up to 80 %.

In general, the spoils from Batyuk were from the remaining 20%, I wouldn’t grow such crap on my plantation...

Later in Nezhin, Slavic sniffed out one more plantation next to the bridge across the Oster, near the Bazaar square.
He brought me to the location and showed the lush beauties as if decorated with ostrich feathers of green.
However, the property was surrounded by a high fence.

I also do not like monotony but we again went out in the dark because of a habit is the most irresistible force… 

So, I climbed over the fence and with the ghostly gait of a sneaking redskin approached the one-year-old trees.
The hutta stood further aside and was not in the way with the light in only one window.
Well, let the man watch his TV program, I did not mind.

No sooner than I gently rustled the magnificent beauties when the ground started jumping in pulsating seismic tremors accompanied with a thunder-like clatter from the hutta direction and the light from the window was eclipsed by the black silhouette of that galloping Dog of Baskervilles. 
All happened in a split second and, actually, without my participation.
The instinct, laid in our spinal cord by countless generations of gnawed to death and shredded ancestors, did the trick.
I could only watch how the fence jumped to meet me and my right pedal extremity kicked its top rail.

Somewhere unbelievably far below, by the narrow vein of the Oster river, shimmering in the darkness of the night, the already indistinguishable fence quaked with the hammering push of the wolfhound.
I left the upper layers of the stratosphere but halfway to the moon, I realized that there was not enough air in my lungs for the return to my native planet. 
So I did not become ‘Apollo 14’…

Slavic was saved only by the desperate spurt from the spot of my landing.
Because among the ancestors, that formed our spinal cord, a lot of guys had got also squashed...

The fourth course was not sent to a collective farm with patronage assistance, we had a month of school practice but this time in village schools.
Another difference to the school practice at the third course, finalized with a written comment from a respective city school teacher, bubbling of what incredibly wonderful teachers we, the students she had been in charge of, were going to become in future, was that each group of trainees had an overseer from the English Department to assess our professional skills from the practice results.
Eye for an eye, so to speak, because we also evaluated them in our studying years...

When we, the first-year students, were divided into study groups Lydia Panova became the curator of mine.
She was a spinster in unrequited love with the English Department Deputy Dean, Alexander Bliznyuk, who, in his turn, was in unrequited love with his beautiful young wife.
Taking advantage of his official position, he employed his wife as a teacher at the English Department as soon as she graduated the Nezhin institute, but the ungrateful one soon fled to someone else in Kiev. 

Lydia Panova, with her hormonal mustache, thick glasses and equally thick makeup mask on her face had no chance to lasso Bliznyuk, although the girls of my group were pulling for her.
She lived in the five-story block for the institute teachers by the sports grounds in the Count’s Park and whenever Bliznyuk had an imprudence of walking under her balcony she started talking to him in English and the next day she taught us more enthusiastically.

The second group curator was Nona Panchenko (not a relative to the famous boxer) she also was unmarried and wore glasses but no cosmetic plaster and looked much younger than Panova.
Once at some kind of voluntary Saturday work, Veerich wanted to treat her to a glass of wine.
I played the errand-boy and approached her with it, like, would you have a sip of lemonade to quench the labor thirst?
She smiled at me with a pleasant smile and refused.
Nona smiled pleasantly at everyone but wasn’t lassoing anybody.

The curator of the third group wore glasses (again!) was a blonde and a perfect fool too.
She mastered English within the limits of the textbook by Galperin for the first-year students and unconsciously loved Sasha Bryunchugin, the boy in the third group.
To that conclusion, I was led by her habit to take the floor at every general meeting of the English Department with a harangue in his address.
Like that Roman senator with his constant call to destroy Carthage.

A local boy from a well-to-do family, polite and ever smiling, he two times a month attended classes.
Who would ask for more?

She literally f-f.. frustrated everyone with her crying in the wilderness.
As we already were on the fourth course at a meeting in the big fourth auditorium, she again took the floor to chew the same rag: 
‘Admire, please! Bryunchugin’s skipping even the general meeting!’
And then even the wind outside couldn’t stand it anymore and slammed the high windows open on the occasion of spring and good weather.
The panes were almost smashed out.
She ducked and forgot what there was further to be said of Carthage.

And at last, the curator without glasses, the curator of not feminine gender, the curator of the fourth group was Roma Gurevitch.
He was also a Jew, as any other of all the Gurevitches I’ve ever met, or as that same Bliznyuk, only older and balder.
And he was always busy with something or talking to someone and steaming with enthusiasm.

Once I had to retake a test on the subject he taught.
The affair was to be settled in the Old Building, of course.
Making sure that he got out of the New Building in the right direction, I went to the Old Building and waited for his approach.
Ten minutes later I grew worried and combed through the two hundred meters of the asphalt path between the Old and the New Buildings.
He had just reached the corner of the New Building stopping every counter moving teacher for an animated discussion.
I returned to the position by the Old Building but this time got seated on a bench under the birches.
Twenty minutes later he could be spotted by the big sad bust of Gogol.
Good fellow, Roma! The half of the way’s done!

Do you have much of choice when the teacher is late for the appointed retaking of the test you failed at the first go?

It took Roma sixty-two minutes to cover that f-f.. flustering two hundred meters, but I’m sure that was not the limit of his knack for loitering.
For that, I bestowed him with the handle ‘ebulient slacker'. 
