
His official name was ‘Roma-Phonetist’.
He was distinguished against all the other teachers at the English Department by the purest pronunciation of the sound ‘th'. 
It was he who read the texts about the Parkers family at the tape-recorder for the students to parrot them in the booths of the language laboratory.
No wonder he was referred to as ‘Phonetist’...

Besides the Phonetics, we were taught lots of other subjects, different and necessary.
Take for example the Comparative Lexicosemantosurdographosemasiology – your tongue would go to pieces before you manage to pass the exam.
That Comparative Lexi… well, whatever.. ology we learned under a hereditary teacher. 
The dynasty broke off at her because she was a retired virgin and chastely buttoned her teacher’s raincoat with a huge safety pin up to her very throat.
She was an irreplaceable pensioner because it was her who wrote the textbook on the subject.

A skinny paperback pamphlet from the institute printing house with the smeared typeface authored by… well, it's embarrassing… the name such… with some whistling sound in it, or maybe hissing?. 
Anyway, the name was shorter than that of the subject.

If during her lectures she allowed herself too much, sort of, walking along the aisle between long desk rows, say, how do they stick down my comparatively smeared pearls into their notebooks? – there was nothing easier than putting her in her proper place.
Undo your shirt on the chest, two or three buttons, and stroke wistfully and gently your hair on the solar plexus.
All.
The hissing wanderings got safely blocked and till the break bell, she would be sitting at the teacher desk like a nice little girl staring at her plan of the lecture which she knew by heart. 
I do adore virgins.

Zhomnir once said that after even the briefest talk with her he got an itching desire to take a bath.
Well, tastes differ.
I do not remember if I took a shower after the exam on that most Comparative – well, how-d’you-call-it – at which I also had to scratch my chest...
 
And all those were our specialization subjects apart from general ones lectured by teachers from other faculties and departments.
And each lecturer imagined himself to be Don Corleone and demanded due respect, like, he made me an offer I couldn’t refuse and returning to the student hostel I would plunge into the study of his subject.
Yeah, as soon as I’m back to Hosty!

The only one who evoked sympathy in me was Samorodnitsky for some of the philosophies.
He lit a cigarette at his exam.
Openly so, imposingly, and with all that in a good manner – he took from his briefcase an ashtray with a lid and shook the cigarette ash off in it. 
To that examination, I came from Hosty and started driving some kind of fool improvising from a lamppost, perhaps from even a different philosophy. 
But he suddenly got interested, sat upright and put me four.
He said that I needed to change the faculty and he would see to it, but he soon emigrated to Israel...

So, I was practicing at the school of a sugar factory at the station of Nosovka (twenty minutes by a local train from Nezhin in the Kiev direction) and Zhomnir was in charge of our group of trainees.
Early in the morning, we went there from the high platform of the Nezhin station – a team of ten students from different groups and Zhomnir in his teacher raincoat and dark blue beret, gripping his briefcase with cave-in sides. 

(...everyone dresses according to their role model.
Beret, raincoat, briefcase – read ‘teacher’.
Can you imagine a plumber in such outfit?
That’s what I mean…)

Before the practice, my mother sewed me a jacket. 
It looked like a geologist anti-encephalitis jacket but from a thick tarpaulin of green color.
I liked it especially its color – so Robin-Hoodish.

The most vivid impression from the practice was left by the football match between the sugar factory team and that of the Fastov station locomotive depot.
The game in the championship of the Cup of the Trade Union Committee of the South-Western Railway took place on the school football field. 
I went out of the school building for a break between lessons and got stuck.

It was a warm and sunny September day.
On the green grass of the field, some twenty men were chasing a single ball and a separate mujik chased after them all and whistled with shrill trills. 
The crowds of fans were represented by, firstly, a frowning man in black overalls and, secondly, me.
I started the count with him because he was the first to stand by the field edge and he was a more intent watcher – it took me a while to go under the trees behind one of the goals for to stuff a joint.

On coming back I left a respectful distance between me and the other fan not to tease his sense of smell with vain hopes or odd reminiscences.
I just stood and enjoyed the championship match.
A sharp sting in the neck threw me from high.
I recoiled, slapped the wasp and jerking around saw Igor Recoon sneaking up from behind with a guileful grin.
I hid neither the joint nor the smoke. 
‘Igor, when you have any questions come up openly and speak easy.’
He effaced the smile and said, no, he was just so, and then hurried to the school where sounded the long bell for classes.

A young errand-boy arrived on his bicycle with a bag-load of doping for the local mujiks in the field.
They jogged and gulped and passed the bottles to each other to furiously rush forward.

The right halfback of the visiting team passed the ball to the central forward.
He went to the corner of the penalty and with a slight but accurate blow rolled the ball into the bottom left corner of the goal.
‘Goal!’ shouted the striker together with the rest of his team.
‘No!’ roared the local mujiks.
Jogging back to his half of the field the striker came across a wall of three locals.
‘No goal!’ they yelled at him.
‘As if I argue,' answered he running around their line still unable to suppress his contented smile. 

There was no way to prove anything because the goal had not mesh and the referee at the goal moment was looking up in the sky along with the bottom of the bottle handed to him by a local footballer.
I approached the first half of the match watchers and put a direct question:
‘So was it a goal or what?’
The mujik in overalls nodded sullenly.

I rejoiced that the truth, even though mutely, was still present in this world, at least among the working class.
The match for the Cup of the Trade Union Committee of the South-Western Railway ended 0 : 0... 

Zhomnir warned that as Head of the Practice he couldn’t put me more than three for the chronic missing of written lesson plans.
And I couldn't even force myself to at least copy that f-f.. flaming plans from Igor, I was physically unable to line dolls sitting on the piano lid. 
I asked him not to worry and put whatever mark he could.
I really did not give an f-f.. found it of no difference, I mean.

When on the third floor of the Old Building the four-year students practice results were fixed next to the Time-Table I was the one and only having ‘three’.
Zhomnir alarmed and started to convince the Deaness that it was wrong and he could not have imagined I was so unique.
She impregnably advised looking before jumping. 

The Deaness always tried to look like Alice Freindlich from ‘The Office Romance’ movie only that no Myagkov turned up for her and she became a flinty bureaucrat.
And she kept in her cupboard a skeleton of the divorce on the grounds of sexual incompatibility because the girls from the English Department did not leak unverified information.

Okay, enough, that’ll do for strangers...

Your personal conception took place on the fourth floor of Hosty.
That particular dating Eera arranged herself since it was a room of girls and among the students of the Physics and Math Department I knew only that pair of cooks from the student construction platoon after the second course, but they lived in the city.

Before that, I once again fell in love with Eera but at first, I had put the end to my polygamy. 

And could it be otherwise?
To Eera alone I owed that salvage shot from gonorrhea. 

So, on arrival to Nezhin for the final academic year I became straight and reasonable.
And I dryly informed Sveta of my reformation in response to her attempts at the old familiarity.
We became a passing acquaintance and vague recollection to each other.

And I returned Maria the book I had borrowed and kept for several months.
Though, I chose a late hour for nullifying that bifurcation. 
She opened her door to the staircase landing in the unbuttoned robe over her nightgown.

If we assume the possibility of time shifts, then at that moment it easily could be I lying in her bed cursing that dork outside too dull to get it that he was not on time! 
I did not develop this theory but simply handed the book in, thanked and left...

And since then my love belonged only to Eera.
Absolutely and completely.
Especially after I fell in love with her again.

Having met her by chance on the third floor of the Old Building in the wing belonging to the Philology Department, I persuaded Eera to skip a class and after the bell, we sneaked along the wide empty corridor to the side staircase. 
We did not go down the stairs but followed the ascending flights although there was not the fourth floor and the last flight was blocked by a partition with the locked door to the attic.
We stopped in the middle of that flight and kissed.

(...her classic breasts under the knitted green sweater of a shade of river algae to match her mermaid’s hair, the silk skirt on strong hips (abstract outlines of thin bunches of white on the background of black, tailored by Maria Antonovna, Lyalka’s mother) Austrian high wedge boots, her eyes slant all too slightly, the white slender Lorraine cross of the tall window frame behind her with the azure blue of the sky in its panes, the splash of the white dove’s wings on the other side of that cross – all that and everything else merged into the picture that I will see and remember all my life…)

But having memories alone was not enough for me, I wanted to keep all that or to stay myself within it, among that desperately inexpressible beauty.
The kisses were to no avail to stop the moment. 
So there remained neither choice, no other way out but to once again fall in love.

In the evening, on the stairs in Hosty, Eera gave me the key to the room of the Phys-Math students so that I went first to open it and she would come a minute later to keep the rules of secrecy.

We did not turn on the light.
The bed stood by the window overlooking the Oster banks invisible in the darkness.

With Eera the burden of protection lay on me, that is, getting out in time to avoid abortion was my responsibility.
But that evening…
...a little bit more!. I'm in control!.. more!. just a sec… y-u!.. out of the blue!.. too late… the train's left… 

You were on that train among the crowd of exactly the same fellow travelers, only you turned out to be a little bit nimbler...

Well, and then – a smooth transition to already worked out technology: as a noble man, I had to marry. 
More so, that I would not survive another Eera’s report on an abortion under general anesthesia...

When Eera was still a schoolgirl she found a ring on the bridge over the Oster.
A casual ring of those that they sell at stalls of fake jewelry.
Eera brought it home and her mother, Gaina Mikhailovna, got sad and distressed but she said nothing to her daughter.

Was Eera’s marriage with the divorced me a misalliance?
Undoubtedly and undeniably.
A mere matching of the parent pairs against each other would prove it to the hilt:

a RepBase spare parts checker – a teacher of German language at the Nezhin State Pedagogical Institute of Order of the Labour Red Banner named after Nikolai Vasilyevich Gogol;
a RapBase locksmith – the Deputy Director of the Nezhin Bakery Plant.

However, the factor of your presence, albeit still unborn, mitigated the caste prejudices, which, by the way, had long since been abolished by the Soviet system.

And yet, even in the era of the developed socialism in our country for my and Eera's pre-wedding trip to Kiev, I had to go with a stake in my anus. 

Kiev was needed to exchange the coupons from Nezhin ZAGS for goods in the metropolitan bridal salons.
The stamp on divorce in my passport nullified any discounts for a wedding ring for me, but my sister Natasha promised to equip me with the narrow gold ring that she, for some reason, wore on her thumb.

As for the stake, it was not seen from the outside, but caused intolerable acute pangs inside, turning my gait into dragging shuffles of a semi-paralytic old man or that of a young Cossack raider, who had been removed from the said stake after a slightly belated amnesty. 
‘Mercy, Cossack-brothers! Finish me off!’

Poor Eera!
Would any girl in her girlish dearest dreams ever dream of such a companion to a bridal salon?
Never! By no means! And no over again!

To me the torments suffered on that trip served the palpable reminder of the truth from Heraclitus: never enter the same river, or woe is to your ass! 
Alas! The wisdom of the previous generations does not make us wiser until we (as the Ukrainian Cossacks cared to put it in their famous letter to the Sultan of Turkey) sit on a hedgehog with our own dear ass. 

Nevertheless, in Kiev, the bride got rigged for the impending happy occasion and I bought brown shoes made by a Dutch company ‘Topman'. 
They were a bit too big size for me but the realities of the epoch of deficits had taught to keep tight a bird in the hand and a month later they become a hand-me-down to my father-in-law.
That’s for whose sake I was dragging that stake!

Soon I felt better and we started looking for a suit to dress the groom.
We combed through the department stores of major railway stations between Nezhin and Kiev – Nosovka, Kobyzhchi, Bobrovitsa – to no avail.
The suit was hunted down only in Chernigov far from the electrified railroads and imparted me quite a decent look.

A week before the wedding I left the hostel and moved to live in the three-room apartment of Eera's parents...

The eldest of their four children, Igor, served as a major of some sophisticated troops in Kiev.
Victoria, their next child, lived in Chernigov and worked in the museum there.

Then came Tonya, who graduated the NGPI and was sent to teach the Russian language and literature to kiddies in a Transcarpathian village until a local boy, Ivan, kindled with his Bandera-man-like manners of courting the reciprocal feelings in her. 
Unable to overcome the language barrier, he knocked on the door of the young teacher and when it opened he mutely pointed his shotgun at her chest. 
Like, be mine or nobody’s else.
Ivan’s brothers were in time to disarm him, but the depth of feelings of the romantic lover impressed Tonya and such her attitude gave her a chance to survive among the superb views of the Transcarpathian nature.
She married him, gave birth to a pair of lovely children, returned to Nezhin and lived with her whole young family in one of the narrow bedrooms in the three-room apartment of her parents.

The parents for their night rest enjoyed the folding sofa in the passage living room, by the wall opposite the wide window with a tulle curtain which separated the windowsill and couple of flower pots on it from the closely adjoined table with the TV box in its center.
Behind it (the curtain) were also hidden the backs of the chairs crowded in between the table and the windowsill so that they would not take up space until needed. 
The chairs were from one set with the table which, if you remove from it the iron, a messy pile of central newspapers, the TV, and the oilcloth could be folded out for a celebration feast. 

When there was no festivity those chairs from the set that found no place under the folded-back table were put in the corners of the living room, draped with household clothes, keeping that same newspapers on their seats and all sorts of things that were put there for a couple of minutes and forgotten for a couple of months. 
In the living room, there was also a wardrobe with a big mirror in its door and a lacquered cupboard with dishes behind its sliding glasses. 
Upon the cupboard, leaning its frame against the wallpaper stood repro of ‘The Unknown Beauty' by Kramskoy who contemptuously looked from under her ostrich feather at all that rubbish collection around including ‘The Major's Matchmaking' repro fixed on the opposite wall. 

There was no balcony in the apartment thanks to its being situated on the first floor but there was a boxroom niche in the tiny passage between the living room and the bedroom with Tonya's family. 

Eera and I were placed in the second, narrower, bedroom with a large plywood chiffonier from the times of the 20th Congress of the CPSU and a veteran pier glass on a small table between the door and the windowsill.
Along the wall with the carpet of almost the same pattern as in my parents’, there stood the hand-me-down conjugal double bed for the soon-would-be newlyweds.
It remained only to get married.

In the evening before the bridal, Gaina Mikhailovna offered her services for ironing the trousers of my wedding suit. 
She could do it, in her opinion, virtuously.
In the years of the German occupation the young girl Gaina was taken from a remote Ukrainian village and moved to Germany and she worked there for more than two years as a ‘guest worker' in a well-to-do German family which led to her mastering of the above-mentioned art... 

Strange is the way of shuffle-and-deal of the knowledge deck and that’s how I learned that Pants Are To Be Ironed On Four Sides.
I clearly understood the rule and firmly kept to it all my life but at that particular moment the unconquered spirit of a young pioneer partisan awoke in me and I rejected the offer of my next-day-to-be mother-in-law.
Like, it was not the first time for me to iron trousers through a piece of moistened gauze.
With the ironing accomplished, I hung the trousers over the back of a chair in the living room and went to bed.

In the morning I was awakened by Eera’s crying.
I went out to the living room and following the silent sullen glare of Gaina Mikhailovna could see an undeniably hot iron print on one of the trouser-legs hanging carefully from the back of the chair. 
Poor Eera!

The burnt spot, albeit blurred and lacking the clear-cut outline, discernibly changed the smoky shade of dark gray of the trousers fabric to something greenish.
I could swear that nothing of the kind was there in the evening but the spot sat on one of the two sides I had applied the iron to.

It cost me a hell of a lot of efforts to persuade Eera not to cancel going to the ZAGS office – we had pulled through too much of everything to make a U-turn at the last moment.
I gave her the solemn oath to hide the damaged part of my outfit into the long folds of her wedding dress.
And why do brides always cry before the wedding?
Poor Eera!

Then there was a very long wait at the registry office because of that bastard Slavic, the witness on the groom's side, appeared only after my brother Sasha signed Slavic's name instead of him. 
A good news that they do not check witness' passports in ZAGS. 

Yes, my brother and sister came from Konotop for the wedding and departed by the 17.15 local train.

And at last in all of its glory arrived the dazzle of a breath-taking moment in the nuptials – they suggested us exchange our wedding rings in a token of spousal love and loyalty. 
Softly glided the ring on the Eera’s incomparable finger – yellow of the gold over the alabaster white skin.
And now, already not as a bride, but the accomplished wife took she my wedding ring from the white saucer to don it on my finger.

On slid the ring, in moved my finger… my finger moved in… my f-f.. finger moved… 

Why that bitch of the ring from Natasha got stuck on my finger joint, I have no idea because at the preliminary tests it, like, was getting over.

In a low voice, I promised my young wife that, okay, I'll stick it in later, and I balled my hand into a fist to hide the under-donned ring. 

‘The wedding ring is not a frill… Oh, no!. 
Not an empty decoration...’

Poor Eera!
But what could she do?
The incipient maternal instinct balked at getting born you without a daddy...

However, my brother Sasha on the pictures taken at the registry office looked very well, like a young Sicilian mafioso.

The newlywed together with their witnesses (Slavic had already replaced Sasha) according to the long-established Nezhin tradition took a ride in a taxi. 
The taxi took us to the station to honk in the square in front of it (the traffic bridge over the railway tracks had been already completed) and proceeded to the city boundary along the highway to Pryluki where a bottle of champagne was burst open after which we returned to 26, Red Partisans, apartment 11. 

The wedding party was a modest one – for the closest family inhabiting the apartment plus the two witnesses.
The TV was temporarily exiled to the corner, the table spread out and covered with feasting of mostly salad ‘Olivier’ which Gaina Mikhailovna had finely chopped filling in the preparation half of an enamel washing basin.
And the drinks were fabulous too.
Like in the traditional refrain in the finals of the Russian fairy tales:
‘And I was at that wedding and drank the mead and beer...’
Subtracting ‘the mead’, of course.

Gaina Mikhailovna, like any other properly erudite woman, had long ago gained the upper hand over her husband, bent him to her will and twisted around her little finger employing the panic fear of males before the prospect of becoming a cuckold. 

(...fall in with what your dear wife tells you and be happy with two glasses of beer on a celebration day since you haven’t got that proud decoration of stags yet…)

Hence that beer on the wedding table.

Tonya and Ivan took turns looking after their baby daughter in the bedroom, and their three-year-old Igor was also sitting at the table. 
Then the baby was brought to the living room and the newlywed together with the witnesses replaced her in the bedroom which, although narrow, let the four of them dance under a tape recorder borrowed from the hostel.

When Eera and I retired to our bedroom for the nuptial first night I turned on the transistor radio on the table under the pier mirror. 
The nocturnal sconce on the whitewashed wall at the foot of the bed created a flickering red twilight like a feeble torch in a medieval castle.

The blanket was too thick and hot and we threw it back, twining in already legalized conjugal embraces.
We were going on real groovy and then the door to the bedroom flung open and my father-in-law stepped in to turn off the radio.

I did not hide my nakedness, just stopped sitting in place.
Eera also froze.
In the mute twinkling of the torch from the niche between the carpet and the chiffonier, Ivan Alexeyevich, without looking up, left the bedroom. 
The prince of the three-room castle.

How could I know it was too loud?
He could just call out from their folding sofa.
Okay, let’s have another take...

Three following days all the meals were of salad Olivier but half of it went stale all the same.
And who would doubt?
No way to finish off such a heap without drinking.

That’s how, in outline, they enter into misalliance marriages...

On the whole, I liked my father-in-law and I forgave him the absence of a minimal kit of normal tools on the shelves in the boxroom niche, as well as his distrust in my ability to repair the electric iron relic of Stalinist epoch. 
Besides, when the three-year-old explorer Igor pulled a handful of hemp seeds from the pocket of my jeans left in the bedroom and scattered the find on a stool in the kitchen, my father-in-law did not aggravate the exposure with unnecessary questions though, in his position, he understood the varieties of grain... 

The son of a Bryansk mujik, he, as an 18-year-old recruit, got caught into the Kharkov ‘meat grinder', where the German Wehrmacht, waking up after the defeat near Moscow, proved that they knew their business by crushing several Soviet armies. 
Stunned by the power and shocked with the spectacle of the artillery mass execution, Ivan, in the endless crowds of tens of thousands other survivors, was taken to a prisoner-of-war camp in Germany. 

Then there was an unspoken of agreement between the warring parties to reimburse each other through banks in neutral countries for the cost of keeping prisoners of war.
And only the country of the Soviets remained aloof from that arrangement since every captured Red Army soldier automatically became a traitor to the Soviet Homeland. 
Hence the difference in the havvage for war-prisoners of different nations.

In order to feed the prisoners from the Red Army at least somehow, occasional freight trains brought to the camps agricultural products looted from the occupied Soviet territories. 

In one of the cars of such an echelon arrived at Ivan's camp, there were several sacks of black seeds. 
The Germans could not guess the purpose of the product not described in any of the cookbooks.

When the prisoners demonstrated how to use sunflower seeds, rational Germans were unable to understand that the final result (chewing of a scanty grain) was not as important as the process itself – that of gnawing and secreting the anticipatory saliva.

So those sacks just lay around, irrationally cluttering the storage room, until one of the guards had figured out how to use the seeds.
He organized a sports event: 100-meter race. 
The winner received a packet of seeds.
Under the screams of the guard-fans, the young and tall, although as emaciated as the rest of the prisoners, Ivan ran first and received his prize.

In the second race, he again was out of reach, but the guard said that he had enough already and gave the seeds to the second to come.
My father-in-law took offense and ceased to take part in the subsequent competitions, but he told me that those seeds were the most delicious in his life...
