
Sometimes the prisoners of war ran for 100 meters, sometimes they ran away from the camp.
Then they were caught, brought back and executed in front of all the other prisoners, which did not prevent the following attempts at escape.
And that is quite natural because sometimes you feel that you don't care anymore and fuck it all. 

When such a moment rolled up to Ivan, he, taking into consideration the experience of the previous fugitives, did not go east but turned west and therefore got to France.
For about one year a French farmer family hid him in a barn from German patrols, and when the coast was clear he helped with the work at the farm.
Once the three-year-old son of the farmer, not speaking any language yet, warned him with his gestures about an unexpected arrival of a patrol…

Then the Americans started the Western front and liberated him.
And they moved farther and farther until they brought freedom to the Ukrainian girl Gaina from her unpaid work for a well-to-do German family.

When Stalin demanded from his allies to return all the Soviet citizens freed from German captivity, the Americans did not argue.
Ivan and Gaina, among many others like them, were brought to a French port city, where, by the way, they met each other and from where were taken by a steamboat to Leningrad.

The fate favored them because the overwhelming majority of the war prisoners were taken to the east by trains.
On the border with the USSR, where the railway track gauge gets different, they were walked to the awaiting echelons of freight cars and brought, over the vast expanses of our Homeland, to the camps of the Gulag in Siberia and the Far North. 
What for?
Just in case.
So that their memories of what they had seen in German captivity would not spoil the picture carefully engineered in the brainwashed minds and collective memory of the Soviet people.

‘Nothing is forgotten, nor anyone...' 

Provided that the unforgotten were correctly retouched by the censorship.

Even I brought up on vivid examples from Soviet literature and cinema, lost plenty of stereotypes when I accidentally heard my mother-in-law talking on the phone to her friend who also passed the inferno of the German captivity. 
‘...and do you remember how on February 23 we bought champagne and went to congratulate our pilots?..’

Ta-dah!
It turned out that on the Day of Soviet Army and Fleet not only secret agent Stirlitz was drinking alcohol in fascist Germany but the captured Soviet aces as well… 

In Leningrad, Ivan and Gaina arranged for their marriage and directly enlisted to work in one of the Soviet Central Asian republics. 
That was a wise move.
The subsequent purges and combing for former prisoners of war and other citizens who had seen a non-Soviet way of life did not reach them there. 

In the Soviet camps, they would not have to eat sunflower seeds. 
Our camp system, aka zona, is the most human in the world and it does not protract your sufferings with humiliating prizes for sports achievements... 

After the central press announced the elimination of the consequences of the cult of Stalin, they moved to Ukraine and settled in the countryside, just in case, and from there they rose to Nezhin.

(...once my father tried to explain to me that the progress of life is going on in a spiral.
I did not understand him, although he drew clarifying circles in the air with his index finger.

The fate of Ivan Alexeyevich can serve as an argument in favor of that theory.
In our life, we walk in a circle of the same events, but they, because of the spiral-like proceeding of life, acquire new aspects and details, so we don't recognize them when they are repeating themselves, we just move by and on, and further. 

I do not know whether my father-in-law had been drawing any parallels between the seeds he won and his position at the Nezhin Bakery Plant.
In both cases, it's a grain disposal. 
But then, what he should need such a geometry for…)

In the fourth year of study I became an almost exemplary student, my classes attendance increased enormously.
I couldn’t stay in the apartment when Eera went to the institute.

At the lectures, I submerged into the endless history of Joseph and his brothers. 
It became more convex and pleasantly slow-go after a joint during the break.
When sounded the final bell I went down to the side hall on the first floor filled with the students’ coats on pegs along its walls and helped Eera into hers.
Then among the hullabaloo of donning students, I looked for a tiny piece of white fuzz on my coat and took it off. 
Only then I put my coat on and we went home.

That white thread of arachnid yarn appeared on the gray fabric of my coat each time after I had a joint in an educational institution.
Yes, in place of the sheepskin coat I wore a demi-saison camel coat bought from Alyosha Ocheret when he was in his final year.
I did not share my discovery of the fluff phenomenon with anyone but for myself dubbed it a ‘God's marking a rascal’.

Sometimes, to check it experimentally, I refrained from a joint at the break and then the fluffy piece did not appear.
So before putting on my coat, I inspected it in search of a white mark. 
It never skipped its duty.

My love for Eera became deeper.
Sometimes she asked me not to gaze at her so steadily, especially in public, but I still hoped to stop the moment.

‘He gazed at her like a dog at a crystal vase...' 

Occasionally, we visited the hostel for a pool at Preferans.
Because of Eera being in the family way we did not smoke while playing it.
Only Twoic at times, with an air of a schooled hussar cadet, asked her for a kind permission and smoked to envy me and Slavic.
And Eera, sitting on a bed by the window would finely cut in tiniest shreds a Belomor-Canal cigarette taken from me.

She did not make a secret of her pregnancy and still in the second month ordered from Lyalka’s mother an elegant spacious sarafan made of brown cloth.

Once, already in the spring, she left the hostel first while I was delayed in the lobby with Twoic.
When I went out on the porch, Eera stood near the corner of the building in a quarrel with a student of the Biology department drooping from a window on the second floor.
Unfit to grasp the meaning of the sarafan the dork of a sophomore tried to pick up an unknown beauty.
I demanded of him an apology to the lady but received an insolent refusal. 

While I was rising to his room, Twoic joined me in the staircase, but there were three guys in the room.
There followed a muddled battle with varying success and steady reinforcements to the inmates were coming from the neighboring rooms.

I recollect a moment when I was standing on someone’s bed and one of the opponents kept his mug in front of me begging for a kick, but I restrained myself because of too obviously he wanted it.

In the end, I was lying on the floor pressed down with the weight of three adversaries who tried to immobilize me, but somewhere in the corner, Twoic was still fending off the outnumbering enemy forces. 
And then the door flew open – Eera stood on the threshold with an unknown ruler in her hands and a shrill cry:
‘I’ll cut them all!’

I was so impressed by the absurdity of the situation: Eera’s pirate warcry, and that wooden ruler in her hands, and you in her belly — that I laughed.
All the present followed my example.

It is not possible to seriously fight someone who you’ve just laughed along with.
I was helped to get up and we left...

Being unfit to stop the moment, I had to change priorities.
My task became to protect her.
Protect from the babel turmoil in the crowd of students putting on their coats.
From her friends with their snake stings:
‘Hi! How ugly you grew today!’

To guard against her fears of the things to come – they said, the paramedic Kerdun in the maternity hospital was so cruel, every woman in labor was complaining afterward about her. 
And protect from so incomprehensible but negative Rh factor in Eera herself...

Protecting from all the world ready to attack at any moment from where you do not expect calls for being alert.
So I kept low and was on a constant look-out. 
That position led to my alienation from the hostel, from the course-mates, from the institute.

Only with Zhomnir I still kept in touch.
He was the scientific supervisor to my term work ‘The means of irony in ‘The Judgement Seat’, the story by W. S. Maugham’.
Besides, I needed him as a means to fence off some place for me with Eera in this malevolent world.
He promised to take my translations for a ‘matchmaking’ at one of the publishing houses in Kiev where he had connections.
But it had to be a collection of 20-25 stories in Ukrainian.

I kept visiting his place and he was saying in jest that his wife, Maria Antonovna, fell in love with me.
The two of them lived in a three-room apartment on the fifth floor in one of the blocks along Shevchenko Street, because their children had already matured and separated.
The sons moved to Russia, and the daughter lived in Nezhin at her husband’s.

The Zhomnirs used only two rooms for living, the third one Alexander Vasilyevich turned into an archival study furnished with a desk, a chair and stacks of shelves from long thick boards up to the ceiling, filled with bundles of cardboard folders, books, magazines, and papers piled even on the windowsill in the wall opposite the door.
I liked it.

And I also liked Eera’s story about the inhumanity of Zhomnir.
His family then lived in the same five-story block with Eera’s parents and doing renovation in his flat he divided the floor area by the number of his family members, painted the quotient equaling part, put the brush in a jar with water, wished the labor successes to the rest of the family and washed his hands.

His wife, Maria Antonovna, a noiseless woman with the gray to radiant whiteness hair, presented me with a book of poetry by Marina Tsvetaeva and made me fall in love with it. 
Before that, I believed that poetesses were only good at lace weaving, I mean, to add ladies’ needlework to poetry pieces.
Marina is not like that, she knows how to rape the words when necessary.

I remembered her poetry in the local train vestibule when coming from Konotop.
Because I still remained an iterant passenger although not every week as earlier.
Just from the sense of duty to Lenochka.
She always was a good child and I even loved her in my own way.
It’s only that I am not good at playing and lisping with kids.
I'm getting bored in less than ten minutes.

In the vestibule, I had a smoke and then all of a sudden started to feel the lapel of my camel coat. 
I don’t know why.
And it turned out a long tailor’s needle, entirely stuck between the layers of the fabric, was hidden in the lapel corner.
It was not an easy task to get it out.
Everything repeated itself with the second lapel.

(...a stabbed-in needle exactly as in that early poem by Tsvetaeva…)

I threw the needles out through the slots above the glass panes in the doors of the electric train rumbling along to Nezhin.
Where did they come from?
Stuck by the jealous mother like in that poem?
Or bought together with the coat from Alyosha? 
And (most perplexing) what had made me find them?

(...there’s still a lot of things that I will never understand.
Never…)

My visits to Zhomnir disturbed my mother-in-law.
Her main concern and worry were if they ever treated me to cooked sausage there. 
Apparently, she was afraid that such sausage could manipulate a person making a zombie of them like in the ‘The Matrix’ movie produced by Hollywood some thirty years later.

She didn’t know that I was from a new generation of robots being zombied and formatted with lines of printed text.
And how would you like, that Zhomnir fed me a book by Hesse in whose prose one paragraph can flow for a page and a half, Gaina Mikhailovna?
(...the power of printed text to affect the surrounding reality through the zombie-formatted me was more than once approved by facts from my personal experience. 

For example, in the toilet of Eera's parents, I find ‘At the Steer Wheel' magazine cut up for convenient hygienic use. 
Sitting on the potty I read scraps of an article about big Soviet trucks.
Then I leave the house for the institute and get scared!
It is impossible to cross the Red Partisans Street because of the roaring stream of KAMAZ’s and BELAZ’s.
There are hosts of them!

Of course, later they tried to put me off the track by irrelevant fibs of repair works on the Moscow highway and detouring of the traffic through Nezhin.
So the waited with their repair until I find the time to read a cutting from ‘At the Steer Wheel' magazine?.) 

Our relations with Gaina Mikhailovna developed along the traditional channel of the ‘son-in-law vs. mother-in-law’ scheme refracted by the intellectual level of the participants.

At first, we were getting along in a bright and sunny manner but after a week or so, she suddenly began to fasten up the collar of her dressing gown with a big safety pin. 
The robe was for home wear with a deep cut but I did not even notice it until that pin. 
Now the change left me no alternatives because between the pin and the first button under the cut there had formed a gap, and any gaping would naturally catch your eye. 

I did not ask her previous son-in-law (Tonya’s husband, Ivan, from the other bedroom) if he had observed the like symptoms before my coming to our parents-in-law’s and with what frequency.
I just had to control my looks.
Although, what was there to see?
The woman had faded long before.

Once we happened to be alone in the whole apartment, just she and I.
It was getting dark outside the window.
I was sitting on the folded sofa and she stood up leaning her back against the big mirror on the wardrobe door and telling me how she was being carried away to Germany in a freight train car.
She and many other young girls.

Clattering its iron wheels at the rail joints, the car was jostling its live load in shortened swings.
Everyone was frightened by the uncertainty of what would happen next and they felt very thirsty.
Some of the girls were crying.

The train stopped in the field.
The guards threw open the doors of the cars and shouted something, but she did not yet know German.
In a nearby hollow there ran a stream.
The guards showed with gestures they were allowed to approach the water. 
They happily rushed to the stream, drank and washed their faces.

Suddenly there were shouts and sharp reports of a machine gun round – one of the girls had attempted to run away and was killed. 
Back to the cars they were all passed by the dead.
The killed girl lay on her back with her eyes open and looked so beautiful...

Dusk thickened in the room, Gaina Mikhailovna stood with her palm pressed to the surface of the faded away mirror behind her, her head drooping over the murdered beauty.
Now she was there and felt herself that young sad Gaina.
I was sorry for her, and I was sorry for the killed girl.
I wanted to say or to do something only I did not know what I could say or do.
So I got up from the sofa and silently clicked the switch.

The light of the three electric bulbs under the ceiling smashed everything into spiky shards.
Instead of a frightened girl of Gaina, an elderly woman stood by the wardrobe with an absurd hole beneath her collar and unforgiving stare from under a strand of her dyed hair. 
Who had asked me to break the spell?
So I was the classically unacceptable bastard of a son-in-law...

Actually, I never felt a particular antagonism to the mother-in-law, yet I cannot help but note that your grandmother at times allowed her feeling to have the upper hand over her intellect.

She was irreconcilably anti-Semitic.
Probably, the years spent in the well-to-do German family were telling on her attitude to them those Jews. 
Folks tend to imitate the feelings of people around them.

The former Dean of the English Department, Antonyuk (who lost the position because of his guerrilla pencil-raids against the names of Bliznyuk and Gourevitch in the wall newspapers) remained a hero in her eyes.
She was indignant that there were Jews all around wherever you cast a look and resented her husband's indifference to her choler caused by the escalation of Zionism. 
 Sitting with a newspaper in front of his massive nose and, when it’s completely forgotten what exactly had been told to him, he would wake up to give you a reply:
‘A? Well.. yes, sure.’
And then again his nose would drowsily get buried in the paper.
That’s a supporter in life for you!

In her ardent struggle against Zionism, she even went to see a newly appointed rector – to open his eyes to the crying shame of each and every institute Department being seized by the proliferating tribes of Israel. 

(...it's ridiculous to approach the rector of the NGPI, named Arvat, a Jew from Odessa, with complaints of Jewish domination at the Nezhin institute. 
Eine lächerlich Wasserkunst!.
Or how it was said by Rilke?..)

But life did not stand still, Eera’s belly was growing.
The waves from your knees and heels had already started to roll over it.
Rather firm heels you had at that time, my nose remembers that.

And one day Eera with a scared voice told me to call her mother.
Gaina Mikhalovna came to the bedroom.
‘What is it, Mummy?’
On the smooth and immaculate statuette skin down there, under the already very large belly, ran uneven groovy marks.
‘Tightening.’
‘Does it pass after the childbirth?’
Her mother lowered her head with a frown, but nothing was said...

The final examination session had begun.
They hardly ask Eera any questions and told to give her record book at once to mark the assessment.

In the evening of June 14, Eera’s water broke and we walked to the maternity hospital.
They were surprised there that your mother came for childbirth on foot, Eera was taken to the prenatal ward and they brought me her clothes.
There I could no longer protect her.
I took the clothes home and went back to where I left Eera.

Two hundred meters from the maternity hospital a bulky KAMAZ truck with switched off headlights loomed by the sidewalk.
Only three red-rimmed beams were glowing on its cab top as a part of a dragon’s crest.
At my approach, KAMAZ suddenly jumped forward towards me and from a long puddle in the road, a dirty mesh of foam sprang out over the curb. 
I managed to jump up in time.
The foam croaked hissing with disappointment.
I landed on the wet sidewalk.
Get lost, you dragon! Back to your lair!
There’s no time to mess with you, today I’ve got a more important mission.
KAMAZ submissively roared off towards the Red Partisans street...

In the waiting room they told me there were no changes, the childbirth would be in the morning.

The maternity hospital was in a long one-story building with the entrance from its end.
Aside from the middle of the building stood a rounded gazebo wider than that at the construction battalion and without the pit in the center to receive cigarette butts. 
I went under its tin canopy, sat on the beams of the bench running along the round perimeter of the cemented floor and started to wait.
I had nothing to do without Eera in the empty narrow bedroom of her parents’ apartment.

A couple of people went from the gate to enter the maternity hospital.
Soon the man went back to the gate alone.
So, not only we were arriving on foot.
Probably, because it was such a day.
The full moon shone high above the hospital roof.
I smoked a joint and the moon turned into a distant exit from a long tunnel with pulsating walls.

The wide-open window of the delivery room looked at the gazebo. 
I figured out that it was it from the fine mosquito net which dimmed the light when they turned it on inside and screams of a woman in labor broke out into the night.

It was not Eera shouting, not her voice.
Probably, the one from the pair who came after us.

When the room became silent and the light was turned off, I went to the waiting room.
What if childbirth affected the voice?

They told me it was not the time yet.
I never stuffed another joint.
The one at the vigilance start remained the one and only that night.

When there were screams again I recognized the dear voice – it was Eera!
But then in the waiting room, they told me it was not time yet. 

They sent me to the window of the prenatal ward on the other side of the building.
Eera raised herself to the windowsill and from under her half-dropped eyelids, she incredulously looked that I was still there. 
She told me to leave, that the childbirth would be at nine.
She did not understand that I was protecting her from this world with its KAMAZ-dragons and savage paramedics.
‘Kerdun on the shift?’
‘No.’

I returned to the gazebo.
Sat there squeezing my shoulders with the hands resisting the chill of night.

In the whitish predawn twilight, the circle of the gazebo floor was suddenly crossed by an incomprehensible dark ball with a white cylinder in its front.
Only when it disappeared into the grass I guessed that it was a hedgehog whose muzzle got stuck in an ice-cream cone.
The rays of invisible sun stretched to the white clouds high above.
Soon it wouldn’t be so cold.
From the center of gazebo roof, a fine thread of a web bolted down with a heavy spider on its end. 
No sooner he touched the floor than the space of the gazebo was cut through with a sparrow flight in the direction that had been shown by the muzzle-covered hedgehog.
The spider followed them.

(...I can see signs, but—what a pity!—I cannot read them.
Spider, bird, hedgehog.
The three Magi?..)

In the delivery room, someone started screaming again. 
When the screams died down two women from behind the net called me to come up.
One of them held the baby in her uplifted hands.
Something was dangling between the tiny legs.
‘Son!’ I had time to think.
‘Congratulations to your daughter!' 
‘Navel cord,’ corrected I myself...
