
The mother-in-law met me with a smile and congratulations, she had already called the maternity hospital by phone.
I borrowed money from Tonya and ran to the Bazaar.
It was a serious banknote of 25 rubles, she hadn’t smaller ones by her at the moment.

I flounced about the Bazaar, buying up bouquets of roses.
Roses, I wanted only roses.
Until the clip of 25 rubles had run out.

Then I hurried back to the hospital embracing that bale of bouquets.
The one-legged cripple on his crutches by the five-story block of the mother-in-law smiled at me happily – he knew where I was hurrying to.

The nurse at the maternity hospital had to call for help two more her colleagues to take the flowers from the waiting room to the corridor. 
Later Eera told me that she was lying then on the gurney in that corridor and they heaped the roses over the sheet covering her but not for too long because flowers were not allowed in the wardrooms. 

Then nurses and midwives shared those bouquets to take them home.
One went to the paramedic Kerdun who came in the morning on her shift.
Who cares? The most important thing that you had been born. 

‘...a million, a million, a million of scarlet roses...’

(...Egyptologists are still arguing why the beautiful female faces of sphinxes are added with a hanging beard…) 

The solution was shown by Eera.
Though, first, she showed me you from behind the window pane. 
The white fabric tightly wrapped all around you left only a circle of the face with your eyes in an obstinate squint.

The same fabric covered Eera’s hair and half of her face was hidden with a white bandage, like by the bank robbers, only white.
She took you away somewhere and then returned to the window and said through the glass that your eyes were the bluest blue but that you were already asleep after feeding.

To say this she untied the upper strings of the bandage leaving the lower ones in place and the bandage hung under her chin.

(...a beautiful face and a beard under it!
The sphinxes have just fed their cubs! 
That’s what demonstrated the ancient Egyptians…)

Coming back to Red Partisans 26, I was appalled by the look of the door to our narrow bedroom.
How could I not see earlier all that dirt and mud splashes and that one long hair hanging from the mud clump? 
I heated some water and washed the door on both sides and then the window frame too, from inside.

When Tonya gave me the carriage of her children so that you would have where to sleep, I washed it as well taking into the yard under the bedroom window.
There I realized that it was the right thing to do when I picked a piece of dried baby cack out from under the folds of the hood. 

No, I did not say anything to anyone, nobody had anything to do with it, that was a part of sorting it out between me and the world, a single combat...

At the institute, Eera still had one more final examination.
Missing it she would have to wait a whole year and take it together with the following graduating course. 
However, you were born very conveniently – right after the previous exam and there remained a week for reading up between the examinations, allowing for your stay in the hospital, and three more days, because there were four groups on a course and they were not examined on the same day but one after another.

On the sixth day of your life, Eera came to the waiting room and said that you were already all right and the danger of jaundice, because of the different Rh factor in your parents, was over and you were ready to be taken home any moment if they allow.
I kicked up a stormy activity running to the head of the maternity hospital canvassing for an immediate discharge of you both on the grounds of the state examination to be taken by the mother.

The head began to hesitate and she said they needed a go-ahead from another maternity boss sitting in one of the lanes of the Shevchenko street. 
From an unfamiliar nurse, whose bicycle was waiting for the end of her shift leaned against the wall of the I borrowed it and drove over there. 

At the bus stops, under the bottomless sky with galactic-shaped clouds in the unreachable height, the end-of-day lines of passengers had already started accumulating.
The bike swept past like the besom of Margarita riding to the ball of Satan. 
When I jumped off it by the small maternity office lurking in a lane, the witch's son of a bitch kicked me in the groin with its back wheel and neighed mutely but spitefully.

I ran into the office to surprise two women peacefully awaiting the end of their working day.
Taming my breath I started the same negotiations.
They made a telephone call somewhere and flatly said – no discharge without BCG, they'd vaccinate you next day and then set us free. 

I drove back much slower, dejectedly fixing the bike’s chain that fell off so too often.
When the bicycle was returned to the owner I went to the waiting room to find Tonya there. 

I started convincing her zealously that we could easily kidnap Eera and the baby, only I had to go and fetch Eera’s clothes.
Tonya sprinkled me with the knitted belt of her jacket the way exorcist priests do when busy with their job.
I stopped scaring Tonya, though I knew perfectly well that if I did not get Eera out of there that day I would lose her.

Eera came to the room and, in turn with Tonya, explained it to me that just one day did not mean anything.
It was evening already.
I saw Tonya to my parents-in-law's, but I couldn't stay in the bedroom even with its thoroughly rinsed door. 

I returned back to the hospital but did not go to the gazebo. 
I hadn't got the nerve to hear the shrieks and howling of women in childbirth. 
So I went to the night watch.
Like the last in the field from the squad of guarding knights of Uncle Chernomor.

I walked in a slow, delayed pace because there was still a whole night ahead.
It turned out to be so dark that when I walked past the five-story block of Jzonmir I stepped in a deep hole-puddle in the sidewalk with my right foot.
Phui!
So deftly dodged the dragon but next to the lair of Laban I really screwed up.

I went further and under the water pump across the road from the locked gates of Nezhin Vegetable Cannery I had the foot ablution and washed the sock too.
A cavalcade of buses brightly lit from inside came round the turn to the Progress Plant.
They rumbled past completely empty of passengers.
I firmly squeezed the water out of my sock and put it on.

So, in one dry sock and the other wet, I went to the station.
A knight vigilant should not stop in his watch round.

I went a circle in the semi-dark and empty ticket-office hall.
Another circle was done in the waiting room with silent motionless people seated on the benches.
Past the locked canteen-restaurant, I went to the second floor to coast through waiting rooms up there. 

Never before had I noticed how strangely change people’s eyes at night.
Not everyone's though, but with some, their eyes turn uncanny and glazed. 
Those with such eyes got startled with my appearance.
They tried to hide the unnatural glassiness of their eyes, but I could easily discern them in the sitting rows of unsuspecting passengers half-asleep in the night silence of the station.
Behave yourselves, glassy-eyed!
The guard is on the watch.

The rain caught up with me under the lights on the empty traffic bridge.
A quiet summer rain.
I did not intend to go to Pryluki, so I turned back and went to Red Partisans.
The rain was not increasing and not ceasing either.
We strolled at the same slow pace. 

The door was opened by Ivan Alexeyevich.
Gaina Mikhailovna was peeping from the dark of the unlighted living room.
‘Where are you roving? There’s rain outside.’
‘It’s warm.’
‘Maybe, I’ll beat you?’
‘It’s not worth it.’

In the bedroom, I dropped all wet clothes and lay naked. 
As in all previous night without Eera, I spread her nightdress full length and hugged around so that I could protect her even without her by my side.

Much later, I learned that the family concluded I had been out to whores on that night...

Next day in the afternoon I carried you from the hospital, wrapped in a quilted silk blanket and some frilled tulle.
Eera walked alongside, with a bouquet of flowers, which Tonya had bought in advance.
But they were not roses.

Her last examination Eera passed with another group from her course.
I waited for her by the columns of the high porch and, embracing by the waist, helped her down the steep steps.
She wore a yellow knitted jacket with three-quarter sleeves. 
The head of my group, Lyda, who happened about, was watching us from aside and smiling sentimentally. 

That yellow jacket I liked and got by chance.
Eera told me then that they brought goods to the department store in the main square and sent to see what they were selling.
A usual at such occasions the store was filled with a dense crowd.
The jacket was the last one and exactly Eera’s size.
While I was happy with the good luck it was grabbed by some girl and her mother.
Sneaky villagers!
The girl tried the jacket on and looked inquiringly at her mother who was holding her raincoat.

To the department store, I was accompanied by Slavic. 
We stepped aside and started to exchange comments.
‘Not bad, but the sleeves are the way too short.'
‘Let’s look for something else.’
The mother shook her head and the girl reluctantly took off the jacket.
I grabbed it directly and sent Slavic to knock out the check.
Eera even liked that it was a three-quarter jacket. 
All that was before you...

And for your birth, following the time-honored beautiful Slavic tradition, I had to treat my friends to ‘magarich'.

In the restaurant ’Seagull’ of the same-named hotel in the main square, Slavic, Twoic and I shared a couple of decanters of vodka.
The waitress had a skirt of white and black stripes on and Twoic liked when I called it a stringy piece of cloth.
He demanded a toast.

‘It's not just a birth,' announced I, 'but a start of new life and life is a transition from one form to another. 
 Let's drink to that from now on we will be filling only beautiful forms.' 
Twoic started to carp that idea of form transitions I stole from Thomas Mann.
He also had read ‘Joseph and his Brothers’.

My next toast was a girl with beautiful blue eyes, that is to you. 
Twoic pulled a clever look on his peasant mug and started a lecture about somewhat causal genes—a smartie from the Biology Department—and that the color would change in a month to brown, possibly dark-brown.
Some bio-bastard with his causal genes!.

Before handing out the diplomas and appointments to the work-places, they summoned all the institute graduates to the assembly hall in the New Building.
We had to sit through a usual blah-blah about keeping high the NGPI honor wherever sent by our appointment. 
Than a black-haired stranger took the floor and said that each of us when entering the hall was given a sheet of paper and a pencil.
Right?
Now, it should be admitted that not everything was straight and good at our schools.
So, let us write what we, the graduates, did not like at the time of our school practices, or even earlier, or even when we had still been studying at school.
When some teacher behaved incorrectly, in our opinion, or allowed themselves incorrect statements.
To make it easier to start, let’s use the phrase ‘And I still remember how...’.
And then it would go on by itself. Okay?

He finished his briefing and I sat stunned with awe and realization how deeply backward I had fallen.
The KGB had obviously upgraded to the conveyor system in the production of secret collaborators.
Hundreds of rats in just one sitting!
And no need for the bait of a spy school.

(...in each of us there lurks a small frightened animal hidden deep inside and thinking logically:
‘If I don’t write they can cancel my diploma or give the appointment to the worst of the holes.
It’s better to write – one time does not count.’
But that time of no account is, actually, just the start.
Later, in the hole you were appointed to, they will come up and show you your essay, and dictate the next…)

Okay, bitches, I’ll write for you!

In the back of each seat in the assembly hall, there was installed a hinged rectangular piece of plastic. 
I unfastened the one in the back of the seat before me, put the clean sheet of paper on the even plastic surface and wrote:
‘And I remember how in the fourth grade my class teacher, Seraphima Sergeevna, stated:
“Well done, Sehrguey! You collected most of the waste paper.”
And I was filled with pride and joy.’

(...I signed my final report to the KGB with my real name and I am proud of it till now…)

The great discovery of Karl Marx about the emergence of surplus value, remained, as it, unfortunately, is, not pushed to all of its potential limits.
He noted correctly, that a laborer some part of his working time toils for himself, and another part for the factory owner.
Good fellow, Karl, hit the bulls-eye!
But that’s not all there is there to it.
The main (yet unnoticed) trick, lays in the fact, that it is impossible to determine who exactly the laborer toils this or that part of a split second for.
And this unperceived (still indisputable) truth is applicable not only to the methods of production but to any other sphere of human activities as well. 

(Hopefully, I’m not advancing too fast and you have time to stick done your notes?
Okay, reach to the full-stop while I’m opening the second bottle.)

Hence, we can safely state, that there are no bad people in the world, but there are no good people either.
An elusive, uncatchable fraction of a second separates good from evil.
So, you think that guy is a good man?
I love your naivety! 
Yes, you’re still alive because of you just turned up in the right part of the second.
Half an hour earlier or later and that vampire would drop you as a lifeless corpse with your blood system sucked-up dry and lymph nodes hanched to shreds!

Or let’s take those same witches queuing to be burned at the stake and illuminate the darkness of the Middle Ages.
The gloomy blockheads could not understand that they were burning not the right ones and at the wrong moment.

My point is, no matter how – at the stake, on the pile, in the guillotine, on the electric chair, in the noose, by the wall… well, whatever!.. they always execute the innocent.
These are not those ones, those were not these. 
But even those, at the moment of wrong-doing, were simply order-executing tools.

Whose order?
Who were they toiling for?
Well, if I knew the answer, would I be living here, eh?

One thing is clear, though.
Between the tool engaged at the operating end and the don of mafia lies a chain of several links making the ‘who’ practically untraceable.
Because, if we paraphrase the favorite expression of my uncle Vadik, which he picked at the history lessons in School 13:
‘a zombie of my zombie is not my zombie’…) 

Hearing your heartbreaking cry from the bedroom I rushed there and was just in time.
You were wriggling in the carriage by the open leaf in the window and your grandmother crouching over you went on with her incantation:
‘Little angel! Little angel!’
And you were literally getting torn apart in screams.
‘Gaina Mikhailovna! She’s not an angel but a girl!’

She replied with a look where glinted the malice of that who had sent her.
But lacking arguments to refute my statement she silently left.
I knew for sure that to persuade a baby with still infirm psyche and feebly orienting in the world that she was an angel was wrong.
And more so under the open window!
Like, fly to where it’s nice, where angels like you flutter happily around!

I started to convince you that you were a girl named Lily and no angel at all.
You still kept crying but not so desperate as before. 
The soul was not being wrenched in efforts to escape the body.

But what was wrong?
I put you on the bed and unwrapped the swaddle.
You cried arching your infant torso.
The reason was found on the soles of tiny feet – whitish arachnoid fibers like in their texture to those rascal marking fluffs on my camel coat.
I rinsed them off.
Blinking your blue eyes with surprise, you calmed down. 
I swaddled you back again and carried to the carriage.
You fell asleep...

Your swaddles were ironed mostly by me so that I would keep everything under control and watched closely. 
And it was me to hang them after washing on the common linen ropes in the yard.
They ran from the central pillar like spokes from a wheel hub.
Beneath those ropes, I learned that I had allies in this world. 

It’s highly unlikely that I would solve the problem of hanging swaddles the right way if I were alone.
I mean it, really, which way to put them on the rope – face down or back down?
I put the first one this way, the second upside down.
And at that moment a white pigeon came from above, lighted on the central pillar and cooed in protest.
Oh, really? Thank you, friend! I'll keep the instruction! 
Since then I was hanging a whole load of swaddles homogeneously... 

Zhomnir had suddenly lost interest in my translations from Maugham.
He stopped his cheerful threats to take them one of these days to ‘matchmaking’ in Kiev.
They were substituted with languid explanations that it was necessary to take into account the ongoing changes in conjuncture.
That the following year there would be the centenary of the birth of another English writer.
Translations from that one would be much easier to shove through.
And Maugham, actually, was a gay…

Well, let’s say, rendering the story about a suicide pianist I could myself figure out his orientation.
However, in what gutter would this here best of the worlds be today without the gay of Tchaikovsky?
Either Maugham or nothing!
Alexander Vasilyevich shrugged his shoulders.

In the living room at Red Partisans, I, in the presence of Gaina Mikhailovna, complained to Eera about Zhomnir’s double-dealing.
They both knew about my ambiguous ambitions of becoming a literary translator.
Eera started pathetic exclamations, and my mother-in-law, without any comments, went out to Tonya’s bedroom and returned with a powder box.
She opened it, powdered her face in front of the mirror in the wardrobe door and took it back in the same tacit manner.
That’s all.

In the evening Zhomnir rang the doorbell and invited me to go out with him into the yard. 
His bicycle leaned against the house wall by the entrance to the stairwell.

Under the dark foliage of the thick cherry crowns behind the common linen ropes, twilight was already gathering and crawling towards the hung laundries. 
From the neighboring apartment block sounded the Eagles’ Hotel California:

‘Warm smell of colitas rising up in the air...’

I did not know at that time what a tragically creepy end the song had and simply was getting on high from the guitar part…

Zhomnir obviously envied the atmosphere around but then started to talk business.
My translations were no longer just scribbling, but still only a beta version. 
He did not insist on changing the author, but let it be upgraded to an alpha. 

He left and I respectfully admired the skills of the old school.
With all their ignorance about the textual formatting of the world and with the naive belief in bewitching through the cooked sausage, yet just a single dusting was enough to seize Zhomnir by the gills! 
Well done, mother-in-law!

Apart from the security considerations, the swaddle ironing was needed to pass the time.
Eera, like a mother of a newborn, was exempt from working off for her diploma.
I got an appointment to somewhere in Transcarpathia.
The exacter location was not of much concern to me because I did not plan to work at the school in any place at any time. 
And Gaina Mikhailovna (since I was so brave) came up with an idea to follow the example of Komsomol members from the earlier generations.
They recklessly went to erect new cities which were not yet on the map.
And, by the way, there was an article in a newspaper that nearby Odessa they started to build a new city-port of Yuzhny.

It was decided that I would go there as soon as you were one month old because for Eera alone it was still hard to keep you. 
So I was whiling away the pre-launch month with the swaddles and walking the carriage with you sleeping in.
Only I was instructed strictly to never move the tulle cover fixed on the hood put up to screen the baby inside.
And at the end of the month, when you would have passed the medical examination the tulle could be removed and substituted with a safety pin to keep you safe from the evil eye...

My brother Sasha came on a visit from Konotop and you had your first trip to the Count’s Park.
Eera and Slavic joined us also.
By the park lake, Slavic and I sparked a joint but my brother did not play with the grass. 
We returned through the narrow gate next to the building of the Musical Department.
It had an iron strip welded across, some ten inches above the ground, impeding the passage of the carriage.

I languishingly asked Slavic for help to move the carriage over, but no sooner had he reached out to grab it from the front than Sasha yelled at him brutally:
‘Get off with you!’
Slavic cowedly obeyed and you were carried over the stile by me and Sasha.
I felt pleased and proud to have such a brother and also glad for you having such sort of an uncle who did not surrender his niece to Slavic.

Your next visit to the Park took place on the arrival of Eera’s brother from Kiev.
Igor came together with his wife which kept nagging him all the time and he, in a soft tone, smoothed away the spiky wrinkles that she kept turning out.
I then thought it was because of her PMS but later learned that she had got that PMS for life without a break.

At the walk, she kept opening her umbrella every other minute and then the rain started to drizzle. 
When she did it for the dozenth time Eera also got it about the cause and effect and asked her not to open the umbrella anymore. 
Igor’s wife was happy to be noticed and appreciated, left the umbrella alone and on our way back there was no rain...

In his family, Ivan Alexeyevich enjoyed the handle of Prince and he was pleased with it.
A natural reaction for a peasant son getting to princes.
And he looked that too, especially when, well nourished and imposing, he sat in a white tank shirt and blue sportswear pants over a newspaper wide open in his hands.
So the handle was, like, a compliment to tickle his pride and he deserved it because he was a getter. 

In the era of deficit not only wedding suits were hard to be acquired but different other types of products too.
So my father-in-law was getting them.
Once he fetched and dropped in the kitchen a whole sack of buckwheat, by the battery of the central heating under the windowsill.
In the corner to the left from the window, there was installed the gas stove, the titan for water heating loomed in the right so that sack of buckwheat filled the center completing the composition to advantage. 
And that was a righteous lump of pride too because of folks had to go for a special trip to Moscow to buy that product and suddenly in a kitchen of provincial Nezhin a whole sack of it! 

(...same sort of pride that some people get from a hunting trophy, like a pair of tusks, a sword sawed off a fish, or such thick branching… well, ahem… that, in general, also fix on the wall…)

Well, okay, if so is your disposition, then you tickle your pride for a week, let’s say two, or even a month circumventing the f-f.. fabulous sack but already even the mother-in-law started to grumble and in return:
‘A? Well, yes...’
And again he got buried himself in the newspaper.

But then in the uneven pile of newspapers next to the TV on the table, a certain headline caught my eye. 
I did not read the article itself but the headline prompted that it was on some archaeological subject. 
I just liked the headline for some reason.
So short and sweet, and to the point.
I even recollected the toilet room in the hostel.

I picked the paper up and folded it in a certain way so that only the headline would be seen. 
In the evening I took it to the kitchen and with a caressing gesture—there even was some gayish tint to it—I put the newspaper on the sack of buckwheat.
Going out of the kitchen I put the light off and went to bed, leaving in the dark the sack headlined ‘The Prince’s Tomb’.
I mean, as a son-in-law I was a classic ‘f-f..bastard!’

The day before I was leaving to participate in the erecting a new city, I went to Konotop to see Lenochka who was resting in the pioneer camp by the Seim. 
She confirmed that I was her father and the caretaker of her platoon allowed us to go out of the campgrounds.

In the pine forest Lenochka picked up a long gray feather of an unknown bird and I thrust it into her smooth hair and it stayed there as if fixed.

(...Indians are no fools – such feathers make a person a part of the free wild world, establishing involvement, contact and tacit mutual understanding…)

When we returned to the camp civilization, a gust of wind ran up from behind and softly took the feather out of her hair to drop it down on the pine needles.
She did not even notice.





