
All the three of my roommates in the pencil-box room were four-year students.

Fyodor Velichko came from a hinterland village in the vast Ukraine-Mommy.
The straight thick hair jutting above his wide forehead was somehow reminiscent of the straw-thatched barn roof on a quiet farm. 

Sasha Ostrolootsky was brought up and educated in an orphanage but he was going to marry the daughter of Professor Sokolov from Moscow.
No one except him ever met or heard about both Professor or his daughter.
Like Fyodor, he was not very tall, but more sporty.
The favorite pastime of Ostrolootsky was visiting girls' rooms on the floor to drink tea with sweets. 
He had straight fair hair, a long nose and the reputation of Casanova.

Marc Novoselitsky from Kiev often accompanied Sasha to the tea parties.
Marc had a broad face with icicles of black hair hanging to the rim of his glasses and indispensable grin under thin mustache. 
He was the most well-fed in the room.

Visiting the room of Sveta Havkina and three more freshman girls Marc and Sasha paid for her tea and jam with most black ingratitude.
Sprawling on the covered beds of girls they started to sneer and jeer at those most unworthy people – the Jews.

Sveta, a pretty black-haired daughter of one of the tribes of Israel from Chernigov, was changing in the face to each of their anti-Semitic remarks but suffered in silence. 
The next two days she was utterly out of sorts until Ilyusha Lipes, a third-year student with sideburns like in Pushkin’s self-portraits did explain to her that those ungrateful pigs were actually Jews themselves.

The four-year student Yasha Demyanko from Poltava rented a room somewhere in the city but visited his course-mates almost every evening. 

We spend evenings playing ‘throw-in fool’.
Yasha was the strongest player and he was the tallest of all too.
He had a long Baltic face framed with long curls.
And he, like Fyodor, spoke only and exclusively the Ukrainian language.
The rest of us communicated in Russian but we all perfectly understood each other.

The fourth-year student Sveta, a native of Nezhin city, kept visiting our room on a regular basis. 
She was the official bride of Marc and their respective parents had already been acquainted.
She did not play cards, she sat on Marc’s and only Marc’s bed and held him in an iron grip,
‘What’s that, Marik? I did not get it!’
‘Well, Svetik, well, I just...’ with cowedly lowered eyes behind his glasses Marc began to meekly defense himself until the other players would show their indignation with the delay of his move in the game.

Then he escorted her home, returned and after the turn off of electricity in the room, he brought in his course-mate Katranikha
For a couple of minutes, they silently creaked his bed and parted.
And that was correct because of the exacting study-work awaiting us all in the morning...

Katranikha had a friendly disposition and she was very hospitable.
One burglar after having broken into the Republican Fashion House in Kiev decided it was time to lie low.
He got off a local train in Nezhin and spent a week in her room because they met each other on that train.
And he every evening took her and her roommates to the both of Nezhin restaurants.
At the end of the week two operative officers of the criminal investigation, following the traces of the fabrics stolen from the Republican Fashion House, which the burglar tried to sell at the Nezhin bazaar, climbed the third floor of the Hosty. 
One of them took a black pistol from inside his coat and knocked on the door of Katranikha’s room, but the burglar had already disappeared.
He was arrested only a month later in the Mariupol city.
Anyway, that was what the operative with the black pistol told his wife, also a four-year student of the English Department...

Once Katranikha invited me to the Leninist Komsomol cinema, about two hundred meters from the Canteen opposite to the lake in the Count's Park. 
We watched ‘Zorro’ with Alain Delon.
Well, I do not know, but in my humble opinion, the scene of the final fencing in the movie was too boring long. 
On the whole, in vain she spent so much time on me, I couldn’t use her for practical purposes because she was a girl of my cohabitant in the pencil-box room.
After all, I always remained somewhat old-fashioned.

Becoming I a student I never fancied breaching the marital fidelity.
Not even in my thought.
For about a week.
And then there appeared some vacant room on the floor, and there popped up the key to its door, and, in addition, there was my course-mate Irina from Bakhmach.
We spent a night in that room until dawn.
She turned out an ardent follower of tactile pleasures with the firm stance on not trespassing the rubber band in her panties. 
Again?! What for?!
She had magnificent boobs, no doubt, with some strange nipples though.
I had never come across such tiny ones: the size of a pinhead. 
However, be busy all night long with a bust only is a hell of monotonous occupation.

Two days later she resolutely blocked my way in the half-dark corridor of the Hosty.
‘You did not say you were married!’
‘You hadn’t asked.’

(...and that, in my opinion, is the main flaw in civilization.
Take, for example, me, I have nothing but the purest and most natural inclination for an honest transaction following the pattern of ‘you give me, I give you’, that is for fair pleasure exchange.
I am prepared to provide all the pleasures she’s looking for from my male body in exchange for delights obtainable from her female one.
But instead of a young Bacchante rocking with mad ecstasy in my arms I—for the damnteenth time!—run into the disgusting fact of using the vagina as a trap.
Bitter are the fruits of yours, civilization!
Toy with the boobs and piss off!
Marry first, and then have it by spoonfuls, or spread on the bread if you like so.
And no one cares a fig about your shattered self-respect.
Couldn't arise a fiery response? 
Hmm… and calling yourself a man after that, eh?

And—the most perplexing puzzle—a mere outline of the word ‘rape' causes erection in me, but I cannot translate this term into life even with the recusant who lay with me of her own free will. 
She says ‘no' and I start to tame my uptightness whatever the cost. 
Probably, because of I love fair deals.
Besides, I was born too late – after the origination of the family, private property, and state...) 

Presently the buses in the Nezhin city stop next to the railway station, but in those times the highway bridge over the tracks was not in place yet and the bus stops were reached by the high pedestrian bridge.
Then you had to wait for a bus, scramble to get on board and stand squeezed in the crowd all the long ride to the main square.
From the square remained a short walk down to the bridge over the river of Oster on the right bank of which stood the Hosty, the Old and the New, and other buildings of the institute with the Count's Park behind them supporting the sky on its columns of dark ancient elms bordered with a long horseshoe-like lake... 

Once I spent the whole ride from the station to the main square persuading Yasha Demyanko to sell me a shirt.
A white shirt with a grid of widely set blue and yellow stripes.
Yasha brought that shirt from his native Poltava for selling at a negotiated price and in the bus crowd showed it me from his grip.
I wanted it at once, but he did not agree to sell because he was wearing the same shirt and both of us were from the same Department.
It’s not the right thing for two people to be dressed alike.
I had to swear that I would put it on only with his permission when his one was washed or left behind in Poltava.

(...we lived in the deficiency era and were well aware of it.
I wasn’t shocked that a course-mate of mine, sitting next to me at a general lecture, wore pantyhose mended with a blue isolation tape.
So what?
When she walked the tape did not flash from under her skirt while the pantyhose were of "made in Italy" type…)

Fyodor, Yasha and I became bosom friends on the basis of dry wine.
After classes, we went to the grocery store around the corner from the church where Bogdan Khmelnitsky got married one of his wives and bought four or five bottles containing 0.75 liters of white dry wine. 
Yasha was a supporter of moderation and his dose was just one in the haul. 
Fyodor and I followed more liberal views.

From the store, we proceeded past the bazaar and the restaurant Polissya to the second bridge over the Oster river, behind which the long Red Partisans' Street eventually took right turn to the highway beyond the city. 
But our route was much shorter, from the bridge we descended into the tall grass on the river bank near the Catholic Chapel and lay there down for a libation. 
The wine bottles bottom bore a finger-thick layer of sediment but we knew how to drink from the neck without stirring it up.

The emptied bottles we threw into the almost motionless waters of Oster because somewhere downstream the floodgates of the dam were shut. 
After short reproachful popping, the bottles froze on the water, like a fishing rod float pointing their necks to the sky.

(...environmental pollution fighters would not approve of our line of behavior, but young carefree students are not turned on so minor issues. 
Besides, when compared to the student exploits of Mikhail Lomonosov at German universities, we were a flock of white-wool lambs. 
Reading about his feats you grow to understand it was not for nothing that the man had walked on foot from Arkhangelsk itself to Moscow.
Passion for knowledge knows where to haul you…)

And lying in the grass we conducted enlightened conversations about this and that and other things, between prolonged gulps for a change. 

About the well-known fact that when the Oster was still navigable there sank a merchant boat with treasures.
And recently the Japanese came up with a proposal that they would clean up the entire river of Oster provided that they get the treasure, but ours answered: ‘Piss off, Japs! Don't be too cunning!’

And that the Latinist Litvinov was a ruthless beast.
‘Read sentence seven from exercise five.’
But how could you possibly read it when seeing for the first time in your life?
‘Sentence seven comes after sentence six.’
‘…..’
‘Sentence seven comes before sentence eight.’
‘…..’
‘Get seated. Your mark is two.’
Coldly serene. Unperturbed.
And his head like a light bulb, only with a little more hair on it.
So poor students had no other choice but to dub him with the handle of 'Lupus'.

His beautiful wife was a fourth-year student already, and in her first year, in the winter examination session, she managed to pass the credit in Latin only at the sixth go. 
He put his signature in her matriculation book and said:
‘Be smart and marry me.’
She figured it out that in the summer session it would be not a credit but the examination and understood that a resistance was impossible... 

And we agreed that when Fyodor and Yasha got their diplomas at their farewell party I would wander into the water of Oster with a glass of champagne in my hand.
Like in the film ‘The Land of Sannikov’ a lieutenant of the tsarist army enters the rolling surf after the schooner sailing away to the discoveries.

‘There is a point between the past and the future,
And that split second is what we call life...’

And then we, happily mushy, rose from the grass and went to the Hosty overtaking the lazy bottles still sticking from the middle of the river.

(...we lived in the era of Stagnation only we did not know about it yet…)

In the blue-tiled shower on the first floor of the hostel, I made a discovery that I had a very resonant voice.
So I brought my guitar from Konotop and sang from the window of my room on the third floor to no one in particular.

Irina from Bakhmach seemed to have notified the Artemises at the English Department that I was not a kosher game.
As a result, the sweet sadness in the eyes of girls had given way to an expression of alert vigilance and my entering their rooms was no more followed by an invitation to have a tea-party.
But I sang all the same.

Sometimes students of the Musical Department descended from their fifth floor to our room and asked to borrow the guitar at least for one evening. 
Probably, they wanted to have a rest…

And at the end of September, when our course students went to the wedding of Galya from Borzna, I was strumming and singing there all night from the repertoire of the Orpheuses, the Orion, and Duke Ellington. 
And people danced to my music!

The slender bride in a long white dress, pressing herself to the massive figure of the groom, threw grateful looks to me.
Her brother shooed off from the record player those who wanted to put a disk.
Not every wedding could boast of having a ‘live’ music...

In the beginning of October, I was summoned to the personnel department of the State Pedagogical Institute. 
The head of the personnel department, without looking into my face, urged me to pass into the additional room behind his office desk but he himself remained where he was.
In the adjacent room, there also was a desk with a lanky man at it. 
He had a shaven face of about forty years old and pale-dark hair of indistinct length.
At my entering the room he clasped the fingers of his long hands on top of the desk and introduced himself as a captain of the Committee of State security, aka KGB, and passed on explaining that to prevent the espionage activities of the CIA agents coming to our country under the disguise of news correspondents, the KGB needed young people who spoke English.
Subsequently, such people, after appropriate special training, would be sent to foreign countries to ensure the security of our state.

Wow! Wild dreams had come true without asking the precinct militiaman Solovey! 
A captain of KGB was making me an offer which was too hard to refuse.
Not for nothing in my adolescent dreams I was trying on the shirt of Banionis from ‘The Dead Season’!
It only remained to discuss the details.

If after classes on my way to the hostel I’d see him with a newspaper in hands, then one hour later I would need to call him at the given number for further instructions.
And we parted at that.

A week later, when I called him with the payphone in the glass-walled compartment in the lobby of the hostel, he instructed me to come to the railway station and to the wooden house of the station militia, near the public toilet, and enter the first door to the right in its corridor. 

Behind that door, under his dictation, I wrote the application to enlist me in the secret contingent of the KGB and for purposes of the conspiracy, I chose the name ‘Pavel' to be my working pseudonym. 
 
At our third meeting, the captain said that the response from the military detachment where I had served my army service made it clear that its command staff entertained a very poor opinion of me. 
Like, I was incredibly lost and hopelessly spoiled fraction of the society dregs.

(...it seems like at the KGB everything was turned upside down – first, they recruited me as a secret agent and then started collecting information if that was worth the while. 
Although, I also was, probably, to blame, in part, for too beautiful presenting me in the forged testimonial.
Quoting the great sage, auto crane driver Gavkalov from SMP-615 (of whom later on), what is too good is not good at all…) 

I asked if Zampolit reported also of my participation in a bank robbery, to which the captain grinned but all the same wished to know why the Commander was so negative in his estimation.

The reason supposed by me was not an absolute fantasy fiction.
I just substituted myself for the projectionist at the construction battalion club whom Zampolit trusted with running errands and passing presents to his (Zampolit’s) young passions.
By my version, it was I who accidentally slept with one of the girls who inadvertently blabbed it to Zampolit who, in his turn, flew in a jealous rage and consequently made of me a rowdy and drug user. 

After that conversation, the halo of my dream of becoming a spy in the USA grew dim. 
It dawned on me that I might have been needed for local use only, just as a snitch, ‘a Gestapo’s ear inserted into Everyman’s pocket’.

The future confirmed my gloomy misgivings.
There were no more talks about intelligence service school (the bullshit served for a fool’s bait) instead, twice a month I came to the room in the station militia corridor to report that I hadn’t heard any political discussions among the students of the NGPI.

On one hand, I felt guilty for letting down the captain and the hopes he placed on me, but on the other – what could I report?

That Igor Recoon, my course-mate who entered the institute right from school, fell in love with Olga Zhidova from Chernigov?

All the evenings he spent in her room and her room-mates exploited the feelings of the young enamored sending him with a kettle to bring water from a tap in the washroom.
Once he was checked in the corridor by my room-mate, the four-year student Marc Novoselitsky.
‘Made an errand-boy of you, eh?’ asked Marc with his usual mocking grin.
‘So what?' the yesterday's schoolboy did not give in and threw up his sharp nose with the tea-colored glasses, chewing, with an independent attitude, his bubble gum. 
‘In love with Olga Zhidova, eh?’
‘So what?’
‘Wanna marry her, eh?’
‘So what?’
‘How can you marry if I have been fucking her?’
‘So what?’
Igor withstood that final blow.
Only the treacherous kettle slightly lowered its spout in his slackened hand letting thread thin trickle onto the gray concrete floor.
Poor boy...

My roommate did not lie, of course, and he explained his action as the desire to save young Igor from a fatal blunder.
But all the same that Novoselitsky was a mean bastard, notwithstanding his being a Jew...

In short, I had nothing to curry favor with the KGB and mend my reputation ruined by Zampolit.

(...but if they had turned a blind eye to his knocking on me, and the fact of baptizing my daughter, and the insult to a KGB worker at the Komsomol Gorka in Stavropol city then—who knows?—I might have easily risen to the presidency in present Russia even without the spy school.
My mother always said that I was clever.

In fact, I poisoned my student years with my own hands.
Two meetings a month with the captain were exhausting me like an incurable toothache.
I tried to kill the thoughts of nearing meeting and think of something... anything else, but they returned to me as to the patient with a deadly illness return the thoughts about the inescapable end. 
At the time of most Lomonosov-like feasts, I would suddenly remember that in three days I was to go to a hateful meeting. 
Or I started pondering on the word ‘seccol’, aka secsot, which was just an abbreviation of ‘secret collaborator’ but sounded much more disgusting than ‘chmo’.

And there was no escape – they had my application and reports telling on no one in particular but signed ‘Pavel’.
So even if I, say, got to a zona, another ‘zampolit’ would approach with the demand to keep on knocking on those around, if I had no wish of a certain part in KGB archives to be leaked to the master-thief of the zona, aka ‘pahan’.

My life became cramped up like that of Sindbad the Seaman when in some of his travels a nasty old man nestled around his neck strangling and kicking with his legs for any disobedience.

But why the KGB captain remained nameless?
He called me his name-and-patronymic but even under the threat of being executed, I cannot recollect it. 
Not that I’m afraid of the KGB, or whatever its new name is – no; it’s just a permanent brain cramp at that point.
I can strain my memory as much as I want and still, there's no name. 
Though not that I really want it…) 

There were two restaurants in Nezhin in those times – ‘Polissya’ in the square in front of the bazaar, and ‘The Seagull’ in the hotel of the same name to the right from the City-and-District Party Committee behind Lenin's back on the main square.
The third one was on the first floor of the railway station but in the afternoon it worked as a canteen so I count it out. 

The epic provincial backwaters arising tenderness even by a thought of it... 
Even the square in front the bazaar was, actually, just a wide street descending from the bridge to the department store.

We visited restaurants seldom indeed, and even then not all because of Yasha and Fyodor always skipped.
On such occasions, they were replaced with Sveta, the official bride of Marc. 

Long white tablecloths on the tables and the wide green runner from the entrance up to the screen in the corner hiding the window to the kitchen showed at once that it was a restaurant for you and not a shabby bar. 
And, as it’s appropriate for a restaurant, we had to wait and wait before the waitress would bring the ordered goulash with potatoes.
To make the long wait shorter, Sasha Ostrolootsky would start rubbing the set of spoon-fork-knife lined on the tablecloth in front of him with a restaurant napkin.
Like, he’s so cleanly.
It’s good he didn’t set his little finger aside when at the procedure.
Some Marquis de Orphanage.

Sveta as always nagged Marc with her ‘What’s that, Marik? I didn’t get it!’ but in a low kind of voice.
Finally, from behind the screen, the waitress appeared with a tray in her hands.
No.
Took it to another table.

But here and to us already.
She moved the plates from the tray onto the table.
Sasha business-like poured vodka from the small and round, like the flask in chemical experiments, decanter.
Shoot off!

And after the second shot, you were already a participant in a witty conversation of the amiable table-mates. 
Your fingers toyed so smartly with the fork.
Music from the loudspeakers behind the screen was no longer sounding too sharp.
You unobtrusively gazed around the room.
Which one to invite to a slow dance on the green runner?

Marc knew them all, from which Department, say, those two girls and even in what year of study.
If that was someone not from the Institute, then Sveta, as a local guide, would present all their intimate details.
Golden youth. 
Burners of life.

In the end, Marc would pay for all from his soft brown purse; at the hostel, we reimbursed for our shares. 

Marc would be a quite good guy, but for his love to teach you.
Coming back from the shower on the first floor, he made sure to peep into the lobby to thank the watchwoman Auntie Dinna for the hot water.
And then he started to drive it home to me that although she had nothing to do with the water yet now she was prepared to do him favors. 
It’s like promising something for someone.
Nobody can tell if you were going to keep the word and they would really have what you had promised but the person you promised it to is already looking into your hands and, in their state of expectation, would pull for you.

(...it seems to me, he was just repeating things that his father had been teaching him since early childhood.
Jewish wisdom transferred from generation to generation.
That’s from whom the KGBists learned to hook fools with promises of the spy school…)

To pay for his lectures, I gave him the book ‘The Otranto Castle' which he saw on my cabinet-box and liked. 
It was borrowed from the library at KaPeVeRrZe Club.
So, I had to return the book first and next Sunday I stole it from the shelves.
It’s easy.
You stuck a book under your trousers belt inside your overcoat and then took one more to register at the librarian desk...

The feasts in our room were cheaper.
Yasha and Fyodor were dispatched after Calvados in flattened bottles.
Ostrolootsky and I went to the kitchen.

On each floor of the Hosty, there were two kitchens, located by the entrance to the corridor from the staircase landings. 
Each kitchen was furnished with two gas stoves, one water tap above its sink and three rows of box doors, like in automatic storage chambers, only not of iron but of pressed chipwood.
There we were cleaning potatoes on the window sill.
A huge lot of potatoes.
Sasha had a sporty look with the zipper of his jacket always swayed up to the utmost where the slider dangled under his chin.
'Okay, that’ll do. Now we’ll cut the potatoes. 
You go to the door. Just lean against it.
That’s right.
Let’s see what we have here...’

Ostrolootsky opened a box door and unloaded a piece of butter onto the huge frying pan.
‘Oh, and here some nice onions, excellent!’
He checked the boxes with such elegant ease that I not immediately realized that we were robbing the provision, aka ‘torbas’, of the girls from our Department.
All went so deftly and smoothly the tongue wouldn’t turn to call it theft.

(...well, Okay, Sasha might be justified by his half-starved childhood in an orphanage but I?
How would I look into Robin Hood’s eyes after all that?
And yet (with all the remorse in its place) I haven't eaten anything more delicious than that Hosty's fried potatoes...
Though, Calvados is a lousy swill. 
To drink it even for getting rid of a hangover is disgusting…)
