
Zhora Ilchenko came back from India.
After his second year at the Institute, he was sent there to work at the Soviet embassy and now returned to finish his studies. 
The books he bought while abroad started to circulate among the English Department students.

I did not know Zhora and only saw him in the Old Building corridors from afar.
He had a curly, rapidly thinning hair and a mustache above his red lips.
It goes without saying, that I envied him—one whole year in India!—and from my course-mate Igor Recoon I borrowed a book which he borrowed from Zhora for reading.
It was a volume of Short Stories by William Somersault Maugham published by the Penguin Publishing House.
The book was difficult to read because of lots of too tricky words.
I had to borrow a Large English-Russian Dictionary from Natasha Zhaba, my group-mate.

In the book borrowed from Igor, borrowed from Zhora, I came across a quite short (no more than three pages) story named ‘The man with a scar' and its size prompted me the idea of translating it into Russian. 
Moreover, that there was a place for publishing it – on the third floor of the Old Building in front of the door to the language laboratory there hang the wall newspaper ‘Translator’ with rows of typewritten pages of students’ translations glue-mounted in it, next to the Time-Table of Lessons at the English Department.

Even being so short, the story presented the very essence of all those Latin American revolutionaries.
A to-do list for such a revolutionary was not too complicated – to rally a gang, to adorn oneself with the rank of colonel or general and to start a war for liberation under the slogan ‘Liberty or Death!’ until he becomes the dictator.

However, the would-be dictator from the story ran out of ammunition and got captured before becoming the dictator.
At dawn, leaving for a moment his gang lined by the wall for the execution, he stabbed his beloved to death, when she came running up to him to say goodbye. 
Because they loved each other so much.
The current dictator, being present at the execution, was impressed with such a passion.
The man was taken aside from his gang and after the firing squad did their job he was deported to a neighboring Latin American State.
And there he became a drunkard selling lottery tickets at bars.
Once a bottle of beer burst in his hands and a splinter of glass left the scar on his face.
That's how he became the man with a scar.

Just so simple a story without affectation frills. 
However, Maugham knows the way to present concise but tangible details in his stories.
He’s some real writer that son of a foggy Albion, fog it!

(...the words in English are short, except for borrowed from other languages, and a sentence in it looks like a handful of scattered rice but might, at the same time, contain heaps of meanings that would fill a whole sack.
In Russian, on the contrary, the words, because of their suffixes and prefixes, are long like spaghetti, or threads of cobweb with which you have to spin and weave what, actually, you are about…)

The wall newspaper ‘Translator' was edited by the teacher of theoretical grammar or something like that being studied in the senior courses of the English Department. 
Alexander Vasilyevich Zhomnir.
A capital man.

(...nowadays such an individual would be considered a regular screwball, but then it meant a dissident they hadn't run down yet…)

Outwardly, he looked more like a Ukranian nationalist than a dissident, but all the same too cunning to be caught, otherwise he would not be allowed to teach at an institute.
His long gray hair he combed back but it immediately fell back on his broad forehead and reached his thick gray brows.
He kept his shoulders a bit upwards, as if preparing to take a sack of potatoes on them and in his movements there was felt that sort of clumsiness which needed years of cultivation.
A villager beekeeper, or, say, a miller who had bored his way up to a professor of linguistic neurosurgery. 
To the institute, he was coming by his bicycle, like a mujik, yet fastened it with a padlock intellectually inserted through the spokes. 

In the corridor by the language laboratory, I handed Zhomnir a thin copybook with my translation from Maugham. 
He flipped through it and stated in a too diligent Russian that he did not work with Russian texts, therefore everything in ‘Translator’ was in Ukrainian except for the translated poems...

Yes, in my school certificate the Ukranian language and literature were marked with ‘n/c’ – ‘not certified’ but after moving to Konotop I was reading Ukrainian books as well.

Two weeks later I brought Zhomnir a Ukrainian version of the same man with a scar.
He bucked up and with a glow of satisfaction in his eyes he crucified and crumbled my labors to the finest dust.
I hated to be flogged like that yet I couldn't but see that he was right.
And I couldn't just dump the whole venture not because of wounded pride but of being hooked by wrestling with obstinate Slavonic words in my attempts to express what I was able to comprehend in the rolling beads of Maugham's language. 
The struggle was so exciting that I took the guitar back to Konotop...

The rumors I became aware of one year later that arriving at Konotop on Saturdays I threw my black plastic ‘diplomat' in the hallway and went immediately to whores not caring a bean about the fact that my wife was spreading for any other guy both regularly and spontaneously, were a gross exaggeration. 
My relations with Olga remained constant, invariably turbulent and brought a feeling of deep satisfaction.
Except for that one instance which I was timing.

My roommate Marc Novoselitsky for no obvious reason suddenly asked me about the duration of my having sex with my wife. 
Ashamedly I had to admit it was ten to fifteen minutes, no longer.
He started to laugh at such a big lie exceeding the limits of the possible and we bet...

Olga did not get it why I had brought the alarm clock from the kitchen to the bedroom, yet I did not enter into explanations.
Its clacking in my brains led to a miserable result.
Returning to Nezhin on Sunday evening I honestly confessed to Marc that I had only five-minute run and he blossomed into delight.
But the rest of the time it was all right – the minutes were losing any meaning... 

Before it, we were visiting the Loony and danced slow dances with the profound feeling and fast ones with the vigorous drive. 
She was good at it in any style.

We watched a couple of fights on the floor, which Lyalka named gladiatorial bull-battles, and left the hall for the unlit corridor in the library wing.
Leaning with our backs against the tall window-sill of the tacitly black panes behind us Lyalka and I smoked a joint with gradually deepening comprehension of the aquarium essence of the surrounding interior; Olga was smoking her cigarettes with a red filter. 
Everything became nyshtyak and the thoughts of my being a rat in Nezhin retreated to the very bottom of the aquarium...

I did my matrimonial duty as best as I could and when Olga said she was pregnant and by the regulations, the husband had to donor one glass of his blood in the hospital I went there without much ado, though, like, I had always tried to be protective. 

In the room for blood transfusions, I was shod in white shoe covers and laid on the table covered with a cold oilcloth. 
There were two nurses in the room and I was amazed at their eyes expression, or, rather the lack of it in their looks.
Their eyes seemed blinded by a dull screen like those of dead fish.
With a needle on the end of the flexible hose, they approached me and tried to stick it into the vein inside my arm so that the blood flowed through the hose. 
With three attempts they did not manage to pierce the vein which stubbornly rolled away from the needle inserted under the skin.
In bewilderment, they pitied me and put their mark in the paper to certify I had given blood for a free of charge abortion...

I couldn’t surrender and I did not want to.
I had to study one more writing—similar to Arabic ligature but with a wider sweep—the handwriting of Zhomnir with which he’d been making notes above and between the lines of my manuscripts.
And the day came when he raised a bushy brow and said that it was something like that now and the translation could be placed in the next issue of ‘Translator’.

Yasha and Fyodor, standing in front of the typewritten pages pasted in the wall newspaper, congratulated Zhomnir on discovering a new talent in the field of Ukrainian translations with such a truly Ukranian ending in his last name – Ogolts-OFF.
Zhomnir responded in a simpler way – it was not his fault that such truly-truly Ukrainians as Demyan-KO and Velich-KO had never scratched their ass in all four years of studying at English Department...

Spring came and together with it the most cloudless and unalloyed love of my love.
Everyone named her Shvycha, but I called her Nadya.
She revived in me the belief that true female principle is still alive in this civilization-scummed world. 
We loved each other.
We were filled with love to the brim and over it.
Love for the sake of love is a lovable love, is the purest form of love, if you love it.

Why am I stating for both?
What’s the reason for so bold allegations?
It’s very simple – Nadya was a virgin inexperienced yet in pretense.

So maybe I once again forgot to say I was married?
The fact needed no advertising, she was finishing her fourth year at English Department and lived on the same floor in the Hosty. 

Some unique combination: virginity and the fourth course of anglofac.

‘There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, 
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy...’

The four-year student guys held a banquet in their pencil-box room opposite ours to which they called me too.
Nadya and I happened to be sitting on the same bed and when someone turned off the light I reflexively opened the zipper on her sports jacket.
She pulled it back at once and when they turned the light on everything was innocence itself and no need to call the police morale.
But Marc had heard the sound of sliding zipper in the dark and started to mock.
Nadya got hurt and left and all was over.

The next day she met me in the long corridor on our floor in the same sports suite, spoke to me and smiled.
Oh, the smile of Nadya was a real thing!
Those dimples on the cheeks, those impish sparks in her eyes!

She fitted all the canons of a Ukrainian beauty.
Black smooth hair to the middle of her back; arches of black eyebrows on the round face; voluminous breasts; rounded shoulders smoothly passing into the hands put akimbo on her big and bold hips over the luxurious thighs of a trained swimmer.
Because she was going in for that sport.

And, with all that, what did she need me for?
And again a simple answer – she was going to marry in summer.
Not me, of course, but some lieutenant graduating some military school who after the wedding would take her to the place of his service.

There was not much time left and we did not want to lose it.
We loved to love each other and wanted it more and more.
But that came later, at first we had to bust her cherry.

The first two meetings we spent in the washroom compartment with one window and one sink partitioned for, some reason, from the rest of sinks and taps. 
So the compartment was furnished in a truly spartan style but for the initial stages of recognizing each other served well especially since the latch-lacking door of it opened inside. 

And then the guys from Room 71 left for a day or two leaving their key to Zhora Ilchenko.
Actually, Zhora rented something in the city but who would refuse the key from a free room in the Hosty?

They did not pass the key to him from hand to hand though but hung it on the shield with keys behind the watchwoman's desk in the lobby. 
I do not know how all that information reached me, but I did not wait for another invitation to such a gift of fate and snatched the key earlier than Zhora.
In the evening, Nadya and I retired to Room 71 and locked the door.

When the knocking on the door ceased and the echoes of Zhora’s cries, ‘Anyone seen Ogoltsoff?!', died away in the corridor outside, Nadya started to gradually take off items of her sportswear accompanying the striptease of the stagnation era with a chant from the pre-war movie ‘The Circus', 

‘Tiki-tiki-do, ay!
I’m leaving from the cannon to the sky!’

Although she obviously was a little nervous.

We lay down on the bed by the window.
On the other side of the double partition made of gypsum slabs was my room, 72.
There, by the window stood Fyodor's bed under the wall socket which was not properly fixed in its place and kept falling out. 

Nadya’s scream from the socket attracted Fyodor’s attention.
He took it out altogether and till late at night was listening to the following moans.
We were not aware of being tapped but even knowing it would not stop us.

The next day the guys from Room 71 returned and wanted the key back...

On Monday dating in the washroom, Nadya was sad and silent, but I managed to elicit the reason. 
Marc Novoselitsky was spreading a dirty rumor among the four-year students that Ogoltsoff had had Shvycha in the washroom from the back…
I always felt he was not indifferent to her.
Otherwise, why should he be so attentive to zipper slider movements at that birthday?
Well, I’ll let you have it now, Jewish bastard!

On Tuesday he went to the shower and coming back with wet hair and a towel over his shoulder he found only me in the room. 
I locked the door and said,
‘Take off your glasses, Marc. I’ll beat you up.’
He did not remove the glasses but started running around the brown table with chairs pushed under it.
I had to move the table to the cabinet-box so that there remained no space for him to go on with orbiting it. 
In the gap between the window sill, the bed, and the table he stood with his head bowed like Andriy, the son of Taras Bulba – a lamb resigned himself to being sacrificed.
I hit him on the chin so as not to damage the glasses and promised on high tones that if he, the motherfucker, would squeal a single word of Shvycha…
When I finished my Sermon on the Mount he set his glasses aright and said with an ingratiating smile:
‘You’ve fucking well fucked the fucking shit from fucking me, right?’

(...the wisdom of ages imbibed with the mother’s milk.
And—what is characteristic—he on the fly picked up the expressions from my sermon.
Ability to languages is in their blood…)

On Thursday, at the end of dating in the washroom, she said thoughtfully, 
‘Yet he was right after all...’
I was stunned that I, like, was fulfilling the plans laid down by Marc Novoselytsky.
Some fucking Nathan the Prophet…
But where was the way out?

The manna from heaven came in the form of a first-year student of muzped.
In his angel-like curls and the golden shine of his glasses rim, he descended from above—the firmament of the fifth floor—to our sinful third floor and handed me the key to a vacant room in the corridor of theirs.
Hallelujah!
But why?
After all, I did not ask him or anyone else and I did not even suspect the existence of that room. 
How could he possibly know?! 
Yes, I gave him the guitar a couple of times in the autumn, but since then we had not even met. 

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my…
- WOULD YOU FUCKING SHUT UP IN YOUR FUCKING SLEEPING BAG?!.) 

And that was it.
Having the key, Nadya and I switched to the nocturnal way of life, rising to the fifth floor when the evening life subsided in the corridors of the student hostel and going down to the third in the quietude of the dawn-dusk. 

She became, like, a freshman.
When our course was taken to Kiev to have an excursion, for the sake of training, in a bus for foreign tourists, she also joined. 
The young guide in that bus spoke only English.
‘Look to your left… Look to your right...’
At the end of the tour, he asked if we had any questions. 
I was so involved in the role of a foreign tourist that asked in English too:
‘Are you a Communist, Mr. Guide?’
Taken aback by such an unexpected question from Nezhin, he still managed to answer:
‘I am a Candidate for the Communist Party Membership.’
'Okay, I see Comrade Guide.’

Then Nadya and I sat on a bench in a green patch of one of the steep lanes descending to the Khreshchatyk Street.
The sun was shining with fluffy clouds floating around but not screening it.
Nadya and I kissed long kisses.
Next to me sat Igor Recoon and sadly threw bits of cookies to the pigeons of different feather noisily crowding on the asphalt at our feet.
Hopefully, Kiev felt on that day that it was—albeit small—but Paris as well…

(...why was it tormenting to be a secsot?
I did not tell on anybody, the KGBist kept shaking his head at my reports empty of information.
Still, the feeling of being hooked and squeezed with the ratchet from which there was no way out, and the constant fear that my finking would get known remained the source of inescapable internal torment – an unwilling rat was still a rat. 
On the other hand, I felt somewhat guilty before the captain.
Especially after I turned down his request in winter…)

The captain asked to sell him my sheepskin coat so that he would go hunting in it. 
The short coat of shaggy sheepskin, my father’s coat still from the Object.
The sheepskin on which I sat with Olga at our wedding party.
It was a part of my image, together with the black plastic ‘diplomat’ and my half-tabooed response to any life problem:
‘Flick the fear! We’ll prick through the freaky hooey!’
To sell that sheepskin coat was like selling a part of oneself.
I did not tell the captain all of that, I only answered that I couldn’t.
He didn’t insist, though.
That might have been a test of my willingness to sell myself.

But in May I pleased him in full.
He was rewarded for all those empty reports written under his dictation that nothing worthy of attention happened or heard about.
He had been dictating for me to write them and the sheets of paper with my handwriting and the signature ‘Pavel’ accumulated in his safe and I was getting hooked deeper and deeper...

In May, returning from the weekend, Marc entered the room bubbling with delight from a new game he learned in Kiev.
It’s called ‘The Game of Parties’ and we all should have a try and see how interesting it was.
Fyodor and I took a break in the game of ‘fool’ played on the cover of his bed.
Ostrolootsky sat down on his and leaned the back of his head against the wallpaper with the accountancy figures of card debts written on it and we all listened to the rules.

The idea is to re-make the history process.
We start from the very beginning, from the summer of 1917 when there was not the one-party political system, but all sorts of Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, Social-Revolutionaries, Anarchists and so on. 
Each player chooses a party to their liking and tries to convince the other players that his party is the best. 
Try and you'll see what a great fun it is!

Our Room 72 was no less popular than a public toilet by a cheap beer bar and everyone who dropped in was met with Marc's happy laugh and the offer to partake in so breath-taking role-playing game. 
He himself, Ilya Lipes and Ostrolootsky, for a starter, called themselves the Bund, on the basis of their shared nationality, but then split over to the Mensheviks and the Social Democrats.

Passing through the room, Sasha Nesteryouk gayly waved his black scarf and proclaimed anarchy to be the mother of order.
Fyodor and I declared ourselves fighters from the Peasant Army of Nestor Makhno and threatened to fuck up anyone who interfered with our playing 'throw-in fool'.

Yasha, a resident of Poltava, became a representative of the Ukrainian Central Rada.
The horseplay was not very long but as loud as usual...

The next morning no one recollected the noisy pastime and would forget it forever if I had not been foolish enough to mention the jolly game at the meeting with the KGB man. 
The captain alertly sat upright and instead of usual two lines squeezed out of me a whole page with the names who visited the room and which party was playing for.
He did not like the conclusion of my report that the game had died out because of we got bored with it.
I had to re-write the page after he edited it.

And the hell of a rumpus broke loose. 
The KGB started to call the guy from English Department for interrogations, even those who hadn’t pop up in Room 72 that cursed evening.
They wrote down their testimonies – who entered second? who sat where? why declared himself a Kadet?
Some students were summoned more than once.
The students were coming back to the hostel with drawn faces, retelling the interrogation, anxiously discussing the possible outcome.
Under a one-party political system, you could very easily be denied a diploma even after four years of study. 

Three weeks later there was a general meeting of the English Department because the Organs discovered unhealthy tendencies among our students.
The KGB captain read out the list of the participants in the unhealthy Game of Parties.
It eased me up a little when I heard my own name – they wouldn’t guess that it was I who finked on guys.
Then they began to selectively call the players to the large board in the auditorium.

Lipes said that he dropped in absolutely by chance in search of a teapot, stayed for just two minutes and did not have time enough to get it what game it was at all.

Sehrguey Nesterenko from Kiev started at once to dramatically shout out the lines from a Shakespear’s play in original language,

‘Romans! Countrymen! Lend me your ears!..’

He was called to stop the balagan and go back to his place.

And Yasha Demyanko was even happy to lean on the lectern with his elbows and build up logical syllogisms in the most high-flown Ukrainian language about the unprecedented precedent at hand. 

The last, as the instigator, Marc Novoselitsky stood in front of the meeting and said he hadn’t thought well how bad that game was and promised to never play it again.

The meeting made a decision to announce a reprimand to everyone from the list of the captain and called to guard the honor of the Soviet youth.

On the way to the hostel, it seemed to me, that everybody was knowingly glancing at me and whispering behind my back. 

Sasha Ostrolootsky, to relieve the stress from interrogations in the KGB, drank a bottle of vodka without having a snack and had to throw up but he managed to run out to the toilet.

Everyone finished the studies and received their diplomas.
They failed to bloat the Game of Parties up to the scale of ‘poisoner-doctors case' who attempted the assassination of the Leader of All Nations, Comrade Stalin, with their medical treatment. 
 However, the KGB captain had proved to his seniors that he was getting his salary not for nothing. 

(...and I am still thinking that it was not for nothing when Gray came to the stoker-hose to give me a bashing for finking on guys. 
He only anticipated the events and came ahead of time…)

The first time that I had that thought was at the farewell meeting with the captain in that academic year.
He gave me twenty rubles and took a receipt that I received the money for the secret collaboration.

Oh, yeah! The sum doesn’t match and it was not silver coins, but the money burnt my hands and I wanted to quickly arrive in Konotop and immediately exchange all twenty rubles for grass.

But I failed to regain the peace of mind.
I rode on the footstep of Tram 3, looking at my reflection in the glass of folded door (I always liked my reflection in it) but now I hated this face. 
Why did I ruin my own life?

Between the New Building and the Hosty, there was a rather wide ditch for draining of excess water from the lake in the Count's Park into the Oster. 
We walked together—Nadya, I and Igor Recoon—for some reason bypassing the New Building from the other side when I noticed an iron pipe from one bank of the ditch to the other.
It sagged about a meter from the still water overgrown with duckweed.
‘I dare me to go over!’ said I.
Nadya screamed:
‘No! Don’t dare!’
And Igor immediately said:
“I bet you won’t!’

The pipe was not wide—the cross section of 10 cm—and above the middle of the ditch it started swaying under my feet.
With Nadya's ‘ah!' and ‘oh!' behind me I still caught my balance, advanced another two meters and ran the rest of the way. 
‘Aha!’ shouted I and looked around.
Igor waved me from the other bank:
‘I dare you to come back!’
Look for a fool in some other place! I’m Ogoltsoff but not that much.
