
Why had I started all that at all? 
The darn masculine pride.
The day before our course had a picnic on the Oster bank, almost outside the city.
There Nadya challenged me to compete in swimming.
One hundred meters along the river.
She immediately went ahead and after twenty meters I realized that my Kandybin-made freestyle swimming was garbage to her powerful butterfly.
What could I do?
I climbed on the bank and was the first to reach the finish line.
I met the winner with a bunch of flowers grabbed in the grass along the way:
'You're the champion, Nadya!' 
 
When the three of us (Fyodor, Yasha and I) came with a load of bottles under the canopy of giant elms in the Count's Park and lay down in the grass to have a drink accompanied with the rustle of green foliage overhead, Yasha asked if I really had chosen the career of a circus pipe walker. 
I was surprised because he had not been there, but Fyodor said that the whole English Department already knew about my crossing the ditch.

We drank and Fyodor began to complain about the pro-rector Budowski who had viciously spoiled Fyodor's entire Grade Book where they registered the results of credits and examination. 
All the grades in his were uniform ‘threes’ but the bitch of Bodowski put him ‘four’ not heeding Fyodor's plead not to do it.
In this regard, Yasha put his index finger upright and draw a philosophical conclusion, that Fyodor ‘was swimming, and swimming, and swimming before he drowned nearby the shore’.

We drank again and, inspired by the bright warm day, I said that pipe-walking was a baby toy because of I could climb even that elm.
Its wide, unembraceable trunk forked about eight meters above the ground. 
Yasha again instructively lifted his philosophical finger and declared that no humanly possible and he was prepared to buy two bottles of wine if I waved my hand from the foliage of its crown.

It was a flimflam on my part because behind the elm there grew a thin tree from where you could move over into the fork of the giant. 
I climbed to the agreed altitude and safely returned to the native terra firma.
Yasha began to argue it was a swindle, but Fyodor, as an arbitrator, told him to shut up – the point stipulated had been reached and Yasha owed two bottles on the barrelhead.

When we finished and went to the Hosty I showed them the pipe over the ditch – a training kit for pipe-walking.
Yasha flew into zeal and announced such crossing a trifle and he would easily prove it for mere two bottles of wine.
If I would hold his pants.
I could not refuse a senior student from the same department, my coach at playing Preferans and Protracted Throw-in Fool.

And he stepped on the pipe and walked ahead in his elegant white shirt of crossed yellow and blue stripes from under which lasted his long legs in socks and black shoes. 
He did not know how insidious the pipe was over the middle of the ditch.
However, it turned out not too deep.

When he got back to us the colors of the shirt clinging to his torso had additions of slimy green.
He had nothing to lose anymore and went for the second time with the same success, though.
My laughter ignited Fyodor and to maintain the honor of the fourth course he gave me his pants also and went over the shaky piece of iron.
After splashing down he was smart enough to get out at the opposite bank of the ditch.

Damn it! I was splitting my sides with their pants in my hands.
They might have done it, by the by, would they not surrender beforehand taking their pants off.
Well, at least the Hosty was not too far off and four-year students without their pants were not a too rare sight there. 

But the hoot, it seems, was ominous.
Arriving home in Konotop I found out that Olga was missing.
She went to work the day before and hadn't been seen since. 
My mother visited Olga’s aunt but she didn’t know anything either.

At the insistent urging of my mother, I dined before going to aunt Nina in the hope of more recent news. 
She shook her head sadly, nothing,
Then I went to the brick factory.

It was already dark and electric bulbs shed their yellow light inside of the main workshop floor building.
Konotop brick factory, as it turned out, didn't use a circle kiln being equipped with trolley-trains over narrow gauge rail tracks.

It seemed to be a break and on the whole workshop floor, I saw just one man.
I asked where Olga was.
‘Where should she be?’ retorted he angrily. ‘Whoring out in the city.’
Then I recognized him, it was the one she had acquainted me with by Store 1. 
Had he recognized me?
I don’t know.

I went from the workshop floor into the night. 
Whoring out...
But, maybe, she’d come to the third shift?
I had nowhere to go anyway.

Not far from the workshop I climbed upon the wall of an unfinished building and sat there like that owl that flew to me in my childhood at the Object sent by the unknown. 

That's how I sat there, in the middle of the night, thinking thoughts which are better be left alone and not thought at all and if they somehow got started, you'd better drop them and not think all the way down their consequential line to the very end which would do no good because there comes the moment when their critical mass goes beyond the fail-safe point and—whether you want it or not—you have already to act regardless of how well they have been thought through on the way or else… 
But acting what?

A rectangle of yellow light got opened in the darkness, a man came out of the workshop door and slammed the light back in the dark.
He opened it again, went in, and all again was dark.
Been out to take a leak.
Nothing to do here.
I’m going home.

The next day brought news.
Sasha Plaksin, aka Esa, from Gogol Street, had seen Olga near the huts by the Seim river. 
He did not speak to her but saw there for two days in a row.

I did not wait for further developments.
The main thing she was alive and kicking and I had an examination next morning.

Lupus evaluated my proficiency in Latin with ‘four’.
By the door to the auditorium where he held the examination of our course, I roared at the top of my lungs:

‘Guaudeamus igitur!..’

The disappearance of my wife followed by her popping up in absentia at a place I wouldn't like her to be was putting me off but when started it could but go on: 

‘Juvenes dum sumus!..’

Lupus jumped out of the door to make sure it was I who loved his Latin so loudly and later, when I sat down in front of him at the examination desk he acted as a skilled worker at a conveyor belt – opened my grade book, put ‘four’, closed it, handed to me.
Farewell, Latin.

After the exam, I returned to Konotop and my mother told me that Olga came in the morning.
Not knowing that her mother-in-law was in the bedroom she immediately rushed to the mirror of the wardrobe in the living room.
She unbuttoned her shirt to examine the hickeys on her chest.

Brand of the owner.
Everybody gets their kind of it.
For someone, it's hieroglyphs on the wrist.
Another one's adorned with a necklace of monkey bites on their breasts. 

‘I yelled at her. Told her to go to where she was.
She gathered her clothes and left.
What will be now?’
I shrugged,
‘What can there be?’
‘No way for her to get Lenochka,’ my mother said.
All that was very painful.

Olga came next morning, but already in a turtleneck.
She said she was staying with aunt Nina because my mother kicked her out.
Then she poured a pack of lies about resting by the Seim with Sveta in the hut of uncle Kolya’s friends.
I asked her not to strain herself, we were going to divorce.
‘And Lenochka?’
‘She’ll stay here.’
Olga began to threaten that she would take her daughter to her mother in Theodosia.
Then she said that I had made her do it with all my whores in Nezhin. 
She had been being told everything but just kept silent.
And, yes, she went to the Seim out of spite, but there was nothing there, and we could still get things right.

(...in life, there is always a choice. 
You can dig a hole or you can not dig it.
Having submitted for divorce, you admit being a cuckold who takes retaliatory measures within the frame of a current public moral.
Without filing for divorce you still remain a cuckold but only if you look at yourself through the eyes of society or—but not everyone is up to that ‘or’—you become a hooey-pricker who does not care a fuck and lives for their own pleasure.

The small nuance is that that the true hooey-pricker does not notice any dilemma – they just live for their pleasure all the time. 

I always had it good with Olga but a whole lot of centuries-old morals and codes of ‘honor’ heaped on me and I was pressed to making a choice: to become a cuckold or go to the other league?

Making a choice is always a tragedy – choosing one thing you lose the alternative…) 

I never liked to choose, I preferred leaving tragedies to others – to the fate, or the chance.
At that moment I used Olga as a tossed coin.
I told her that everything would be effaced and forgotten if she had got me grass for a joint by the end of the day.
She left and came back by the evening, weary and tired.
She said she had walked the whole city but no one had any grass.
The finger of fate.
A cruel chance.

Alea jacta est!. 

(were Olga to get the joint, I, as a noble man, would only have to keep my word. 
We would have to start living on and now this letter would have been written to you by someone else. 
And maybe no letter would be needed, but you would have a dad and mom.
After all, changing just one, even a tiny detail harbors innumerable options for possible consequences.

If you, say, flick in a time machine to the Mesozoic era, where you accidentally slap-kill one single mosquito then, returning back, you find yourself in an irreversibly changed future – yes, the same year when you had left, but you yourself do not correspond to the contemporary standards. 
And no one to blame, you should have watched out better in what you were stepping in that Mesozoic past.

Just a single joint would return to me the family idyll with the ideal woman.
She was not trading herself for money or some benefits, and she cheated on me just for her personal pleasure.
A most natural exchange of joys – you to me, and I to you.
The fact that she was exchanging with someone else did not take off from my having it good with her.
Why did I so foolishly discarded that what I wanted and was getting?
The moral foundations of the society left me no other choice but to join the crowd of dirty stupid ‘seminarists’…)

She made me an excellent blowjob for goodbye and asked to come to the aunt Nina's next day for something important. 
So, by the will of the cruel chance, I became a cuckold.

(...for a long time I couldn’t understand why I never liked Lermontov, but now I know that’s because of his lies.
Lermontov lied from the very beginning, from his poem to Pushkin’s death:

‘...with the lead of a bullet in his chest, he drooped his head...' 

Well, let’s say this lie was caused by the ignorance of anatomy.
A hussar is not a doctor after all, and for him, the groin, where, actually hit the bullet, and the chest is all the same. 
Half a meter higher, half a meter lower, what the hell difference?!

But the following lie I really cannot forgive:

‘...he rebelled against the society’s morals...’

Pah! Stop kidding, Lermontov-boy.
He did not rebel, on the contrary, he had exactly fulfilled the precepts of the society for such a case.
With the utmost rigor and slavish loyalty, Pushkin followed the rules. 

And since he himself did not dare disobey the moral charter of the society then what can we, mere mortals, do in case of violation of marital fidelity but to file for divorce?

One always looks for some excuses to justify their beloved.

What if Pushkin did not obey the dictates of customs and morals?
What if he intentionally used them for his personal gains?
What if the aging weary poet, worn out with the excesses of poetical lifestyle, challenged a greenhorn French youth on a visit to Russia for too close attention to his wife and feigned a Shakespearean Othello with the hidden agenda to get killed at the ensuing duel and pass away in style?

However, the development of this hypothesis requires three doctoral degrees: that in gerontology, in psychology, and in philology.
And I have a more important matter on my hands – the letter to my daughter, so we’ll flashback, from Varanda to Konotop...)

The next day at the aunt Nina’s hutta, she and her aunt performed in duo what I had already heard from Olga about a fresh start from the clean leaf.
Then her aunt went to her work on the second shift.
Olga and I drank a glass of moonshine each and for about an hour were killing each other all over the kitchen and the living room.

When we got dressed Olga asked – what now?
I replied that the question had been answered and, alas, not by me.
She cried and said that she knew what to do now and started swallowing some pills.
I managed to take away a pair of then but there had been more than that.

I rushed out of the hutta, ran along Budyonny Street and past the Plant Park to the Bazaar where a telephone booth hung at the intersection.
Its receiver luckily was nor torn away and it worked.
I called an ambulance.
Probably, it's not every day they were called for a suicide attempt but the ambulance car had overtaken me on the way back. 

In the aunt Nina's hutta, Olga sat limply on a stool in the middle of the kitchen and gave reluctant answers to the doctor and nurse in white coats. 
She had a large mug in her hands and on the floor by her feet was a basin where to she had done the stomach lavage.

The crisis was obviously over and I left without going into details. 
It was unlikely that she would take another try and from my own experience, I knew that gastric lavage brings about reassessment of values and considering things from a different perspective. 

Two days later I was told that they had seen Olga boarding a Moscow train with some kind of a black-haired guy.
Most likely, that was the one she’d been cheating on with my participation two days before...

At the end of the month, I went to Nezhin to the fourth-course graduation party as I promised Nadya. 

The party was arranged in the hall of celebrations on the first floor of the Canteen.
Nadya was the most beautiful, in a long dress made of light chiffons, like a bride at her wedding, only pink. 

In the end, everyone went to the Oster bank behind the hostel to build a fire from the thick copybooks with lecture notes scribbled through all the four years. 
Fyodor and Yasha did not add their share to the fire, because of I had never seen anything like a copybook near them and their absence at the party as well.

The full moon was shining, the bonfire kept devouring with its tongues of the nationalistically yellow-and-blue flame the pages of once so necessary notes.
The former students stood looking at the fire—from now on each for themselves—and in the dark tall grass around the teacher of theoretical grammar wandered in circles.
He was a dwarf, about up to your waist in height, but they said he was very clever.
One of the graduates, the ugliest of all and, as gossip had it, dull and rude, agreed to marry him so as not to go to a village to work off for her diploma.
She herself was also a villager so she knew what she was losing by making such a choice.

For our farewell wedding night with Nadya, we went up to her room where there were even curtains on the window.
We had goodbyes, and slept a little, and woke up for new goodbyes in breaststroke, and dog paddle, and backstroke, and front crawl and freestyle…

When the pale morning light began sipping through the curtains and she reached for the first blowjob in her life I wearily pulled back.
Let her future husband be first at least at something. 
All of us—the cuckoldry brethren—have to be generous to each other...

When a mujik has nothing to do he finds hard labor for himself.
The hutta at the Decemberists 13 amply provided an inexhaustible source of what to fill your leisure time with and my father harnessed me into the infrastructure reconstruction...

Brick paneling the earth cellar under the kitchen, replacing the fence and the wicket, constructing a summer shower next to the shed, insulating the outhouse in the garden, laying the brick paths so that not to knead the mud with feet after the rain.
Summer always brims up with tasks.

For breaks, I visited Lyalka. 
He lived by the Peace Square on the second floor in one of red brick five-story blocks between the Peace movie theater and Department Store.
In the one above the ice-cream pavilion ‘Snowflake’.
His father, in his youth, was a criminal and on reaching the venerable age became an ideological inspirer of the following generations of criminals. 
Returning from the zone they shared warm recollections about Lyalka's dad coming to the court in a jacket over a tank shirt with instructions to keep their tail up when in the zone, bandied words with the judge and was forcibly escorted out. 
I was too late to meet him.
But his mother-in-law, Lyalka’s grandma, was still living like a hermit in the bedroom with a view of the pitch-mounted roofing felt on the ‘Snowflake’s’ roof.
She shared the room with the decrepit but malicious lap-dog Bayba and Lyalka’s mom.

Lyalka replaced his dad in the line of moral support to guys departing to the zone.
He did not attend the court sittings but he knew when the guys were sent to the place of serving their time and came to the station to say goodbye through the bars of a special car, aka ‘stolypin'. 

The balcony in Lyalka’s flat went from the living room into a wide quiet courtyard between the five-story buildings with occasional shady apple trees and a hutta locked up with criss-cross nailed boards – the incubator for growing criminals.
In the dovecot above the hutta, Lyalka’s younger brother Slave, aka Rabentus, held pigeons when not in the zone.
Their mother, Maria Antonovna, a dressmaker from the atelier behind the Main Post-Office, once dreamed of Lyalka becoming a violinist and even had bought him a violin, which he stacked away in the nailed up hutta when like going to a lesson.
So she had managed only inoculate to him the love for good clothes.
Lyalka's shirts and jeans and shoes were always tiptops. 

But he also loved music unlike Rabentus whose interests were limited to his pigeons and havvage, that's why he was twice as thick as slender Lyalka. 
On that balcony, we listened to Czeslav Neman, Slade, AC/DC… 

When the doorbell was starting to buzz, Lyalka would go to the hallway and lead the visitor to the kitchen to sell them some jeans or a shirt with foreign stickers. 
If it turned out to be not a client but some of his brother's bros, or simply a guy from the city rowdies, like Count-Junior, or Horse, who just was dragging through the yard and dropped in attracted by the sound of the loudspeakers (Lyalka's hutta enjoyed a dynastic respect) to share his notions that everything should be just and by justice. 
Then Lyalka put a record of over-hard rock – the Arrow Smith or the Black Sabbath.
Those home-made natural philosophers of justice concepts could not withstand more than one number and left the sofa under a hard carpet cover with a sudden recollection of some urgent business awaiting them in the city. 
Lyalka closed the door after them, sighed and rolling his eyes under the forehead shook his head – oh, those boars! but the traditions oblige.
Then he stroke his a la cardinal beard and put on records of Engelbert Humperdink.

In fact, he had a craving for knowledge and was not shy to show it.
One day he did not hesitate to ask me about the meaning of ‘excess' word after hearing it from me. 
In short, he needed me as an oasis among all those champions for justice.
No doubt, grass was the main thing to connect us and in the period between the seasons, all kind of pills – noxiron, seduxen, kadein, one only had to know what should be mixed with what and in which proportion. 

He was meeting with his girlfriend Valentina at the dance-floor in the Loony.
She had beautiful Spanish eyes, as one of the boars put it in the form of a compliment:
‘I'd pick such eyes up on the wall.' 

One evening I danced with her girlfriend Vera Yatsenko though I knew that Quak was pining after her for years.
She was walking out with him for a week and then did not want to recognize him for months.

After the dances, Quak stopped me and her in the park alley.
He asked Vera for an apology and permission to have a talk with me.
She went on in a leisurely crowd flowing to the exit from the night Loony park.
Quak and I stepped aside to the trimmed bushes so as not to be in the way of the current.
I could see that Quak was drunk, not quite blind but well loaded.

He leaned his forehead against my shoulder and looking at the ground said:
‘Sehrguey, I’ve been with Olga.’
Of course, that frank confession scraped me, but I avoided explaining the fallacy of such a perspective – that it was not he who was with her, but she who was with him, and that he was not the only one she used.
First of all, he wouldn't get such subtleties even when sober, to leave alone his current state, and secondly, I needed to catch up with Vera Yatsenko. 

I escorted her to one of the two-story houses along the Peace Avenue and, when we were standing in the dark courtyard, Quak popped up in the gate and revved forward with inappropriate exclamations.
I took a couple of steps to meet him and hit in the head.
He fell down and shouted,
‘So, that’s how you meet?! Got prepared?!’

Probably, the drunk really have their guardian angel, but with that preventive blow I dislocated one of my fingers and couldn’t box anymore.
When Quak rose to his feet the fight went into a wrestling single combat.
We reeled over the ground and after the threat from Vera Yatsenko that she would call her brother and father, we left the yard.

Walking in the same direction, we gradually restored being on speaking terms, touched on the details of the recent battle and discussed the indisputable merits of Vera Yatsenko.
We did not return to the subject of Olga.

Near the Under-Overpass he boarded Tram 3 with the destination to the Settlement and I went on, bypassed the Station and proceeded along the railway tracks to Decemberists Street because my shoulder was slightly bleeding torn by the coal slag cover of the walkway in the courtyard of the two-story building.
Coal slag is good to overcome the autumn or heavy rains mud, but as tatami, it falls short of the cinder path. 

The next morning I had to tell my parents that I had fallen off a bicycle – a traditional excuse which causes an understanding smirk on the inquirer. 

(...probably, the guardian angels are also retiring from their duty.
Many years later Quak died the traditional Ukrainian mujik’s death – fell asleep in a snowdrift and froze a few meters from his hutta.
Sometimes it seems to me that the only place where he still exists is my memories of him…)

Soon I was summoned to the militia station near Store 5 to explain my role in Olga's suicide attempt of which they were informed by the ambulance workers. 
I assured that I was not an accomplice and they let me go.

My mother collected Olga's clothes and shoes that remained in the hutta: light and warm – for all seasons. 
It turned out a hefty bale, which she lined with a white cloth for sending by the railway post cars.
I asked Vladya for help and we dragged that bale along the tracks to the station luggage office.
We tied it with a rope to a nickel plated pipe from a window shaft.
The way like prehistoric hunters or Aborigine savages carry killed game home.
Only we carried in the opposite direction – away, for it was not prey, but a loss. 

In the office, I wrote the Theodosia address on the cloth and got the receipt indicating the weight. 

When we got out of there Vladya obviously wanted to tell me something, but he restrained himself. 
I always knew that he was more tactful than Quak.

There are thoughts that are better not to be started…

The curtain shaft bent under the load we’d been dragging and I threw it into the bushes behind the high first platform of the station not to carry it along with me to Lyalka...
