
On September 1, at lining-up around the big pensive bust of Gogol between Old and the New Buildings, the rector of the Institute, as always, announced that the classes were starting for all except the second and third-year students, who would go for a month to villages with patronizing help.
The second and third-year students of all the Departments, as always, shouted ‘Hurray!’

The next morning a pair of big buses took the sophomores along the Moscow highway to the district center of Borzna and from there along a bumpy road to the Bolshevik village, but the final kilometer turned unpassable because of the too deep mud.
The students and half a dozen of overseer teachers get out of the buses onto the roadside and walked along a narrow path trodden through the green thicket of the rain-soaked corn stalks to the village where they had to patronize in hop harvesting. 

Many of them dragged ‘torbas’, cloth bags filled with provision taken from their homes.
My burden was lighter – the guitar with its neck across my shoulder and cigarettes in my pocket so the walk would be a buzz but for my sneakers getting wet through.
In front of me a red sweater, blue jeans and black rubber boots plus a white kerchief-visor on top of all were dragging their ‘torba’.

I am often amazed at my own myself – whenever I meet an object with the hair longer than mine, the hips wider and rounder, I get taken in completely. 
I am routed, conquered, amazed, sticking my paws up and ready to surrender and plead for the winner's mercy.

‘Hey, girl, your boots are size 45?’
A haughty look over her shoulder,
‘46.’
Like the ‘hello’ so is the answer.
A poor try at hooking, but at least I was not cut dead.
Overtaking her I looked back to smile at the inexorably disgruntled face and went on.
I had not the habit of winking to girls also, reportedly, they like it. 

The Bolshevik village was one wide empty street of half a dozen huttas and some larger buildings standing apart in the fog and dank dampness behind the trees that still dropped rare heavy drops from their foliage.
Everyone went into one-story canteen murky and dark because of the bad weather outside narrow windows.
Long tables under the worn-out oilcloth and the plywood shutter of the locked dispensing window witnessed the purpose of the room.
After protracted negotiations between the overseer teachers and local authorities, the students began to be accommodated for staying in the village. 

A pair of wooden two-story buildings with four-person rooms were provided for student girls and the guys were given the large hall on the second floor of the club wooden as well.
Each student got a mattress with a pillow, an army blanket and a pair of sheets.
Taking this bundle to the club, I was amazed at the simplicity of design of the ad hoc dormitory.
The low decking of board shields made a too familiar view to me.
Like, spending a month in an overcrowded clink of the guards' house. 
Some thirty mattresses were spread on top of the decking, side by side, so for stretching out one had to crawl along onto his mattress on all fours. 

Fortunately, near the door, there remained a tall billiard table covered with a worn green cloth.
Choosing it for my bed I did not pretend a thief-master but simply noticed that each and every of the billiard balls in the rack on the wall was severely impaired making the whole set a collection of half-eaten apples.
No sane stretch of the imagination would suppose any possibility of playing the game which rendered the table just an item of the scenery. 
That were the grounds for my sleeping four meters away from the common decking, half a meter higher than I was used to, yet without neighbors snoring into my ears.
The table width allowed for a piece of a broken lacquered cue to be placed next to the mattress because of the gloomy rumors circulating among the student guys about the ill-will moods towards us expressly harbored by the local youth.

We were fed at the canteen three times a day.
The students 'eeked' and 'ughed' but I could sympathize with them, it was as havvable havvage as anywhere else. 

The next morning we went to harvest the hops.
It grew in rows of three-meter stems that reached the wires stretched over the field. 
The tightly wreathed dark green leaved stems had to be pulled down to the ground for picking off the clusters of soft pale-green cones.
When the collected cones filled up a shallow wicker basket with two handles, it was dumped into a box on the scales.
The overseer teacher wrote down the kilos you’ve brought in their notebook for later calculation of your payment after deductions for food and bed.
But the price per kilo of harvested crops was so insignificant that simple arithmetic counting nipped in the bud all labor enthusiasm…

Of course, there still remained strong incentives of the sonorous yells and calls of fervent young voices over the field and so diverse but equally attractive (each in its own way) forms of female students. 
However, my fingers, accustomed to grabbing a breaker and strumming the strings, flatly refused to partake in that Chinese-peasant-like assiduous labor.
My first day of work on the plantation of hops was also the last.

In the future, I did various jobs: I went to the district town of Borzna a couple of times to load provision for the canteen, and I mended flooring on a cow farm with the scraps of planks, and I sawed wood for a local woman in exchange for blurry strong moonshine, and I.. and.. well, perhaps, that’s all but, in general, not a little after all.

The hop-harvesters had earned some forty rubles for that month.
A couple of students working at the dryer got about hundred, and I, for all my patronizing efforts, was given twelve rubles and some kopecks at the institute cash desk.
Most likely, it was earned in that three days on the farm where I sawed and nailed boards bridging the dung over.

Once, in response to a strong hammer blow, liquid dung jetted through a gap in between the uneven planks right into my face. 
The cow standing in the nearest stall turned to me her left eye and grinned with such satisfaction that now I know for certain that those cattle are not as stupid as they pretend to be. 

Though, the main occupation on the farm was playing 'throw-in fool' with three local mujiks.
My photographic deck of cards plunged them into a catatonic stupor, they gazed and gazed and gazed at the dealt hands and it took too long for them to throw a card in, they obviously did not want to part with any of the nude girlies. 

(...now the era has changed and the same cards, but in color, are sold at stalls in the railway stations...)

One of the students who worked at the dryer, redheaded Grisha from the biofac also played 'throw-in fool' with me after his work.
He really was keen on winning.
The hot-tempered guy even found a deck of ordinary cards to replace my black-and-white gallery, but the school of Yasha Demyanko was bringing its fruits and by the end of the month he had lost to me a twenty-five-bottle box of vodka.
However, mindful of Sasha Ostrolootsky’s orphanage wisdom, that a bird in the hand is better than a pie tomorrow studded with rubies from the sky, I on the last day told the fiery-cheerful Grisha that one bottle immediately would write off all his debt and he happily ran to the village store, otherwise I wouldn’t get even as much.

It's not that I was really buzzed with vodka or moonshine, no, I simply was pushed to them by my social position and the opinion of the society about me. 

(...we are prisoners of opinion about us. 
If they will tell me that someone became a drunkard because of that 'noblesse oblige', I am prepared to believe it…) 

For example, a male student from the philfac with a couple of his group-mate girls wandered to the farm.
They lingered by the stall of the bull tied with an iron chain.
The guy threw to the beast a scrap of hay taken from the cow in a nearby stall.
Smelling the cow’s scent in the delivered hay, the bull got raised and kicked up mad bellowing and pulling at his chain.

I accidentally passed by and that was enough.
In the evening oral news bulletin at the canteen, they were relishing the news about Ogoltsoff taking philfac girls on the excursion around the bull's dick. 

Personal image is a terrible force and you will never prove to anyone that with my tremulous attitude towards girls I do not even wink at them.

Having familiarized myself with the Bolshevik work and living conditions, I went to Konotop. 
First of all, to change the sodden sneakers, and then, in Konotop I was also awaited by the pressing harvesting labors...

Back in August, Lyalka and I made a couple of regional tours around the corners of the city backstreets away from its noisy main thoroughfares.
In the quietude of the forlorn lanes, we took into account the small but magnificent plantations of cannabis gently waving to us from behind the fences with their softly outlined bushy branches under loads of ripening heads. 

He was the guide and I was a tourist admiring the diligence of Konotopers carefully cultivating their personal plots.
The time had come to help them in harvesting.

Of course, not everybody waited for my humanitarian patronizing help.
However, there still remained unharvested plots.

I was a nobble robber, acquainted with the concepts of justice, and did not take away more than two trees from one plantation.
And those two were a pretty big hell of a load to carry.

Whereto?

To the nearest nook for a too shallow, and I’d say predatory processing.
That is, the final product accounted for meager 10% of what could be obtained from the same amount of the raw material when approached with a balanced and well thought-out technology.
Elementary ignorance and nothing else.

After laborious night vigils in Konotop, I was already well prepared to plunge into the everyday work at Bolshevik. 

When on the first evening, after my coming back, I was thoughtfully tuning the guitar up – ...you leave it without a supervision and anyone would twist the tuning machine hither and thither, it's good they haven't torn the strings at all.. – two local guys came into the clink-like dormitory. 
They announced their desire to play billiards.

Out of curiosity – how could anyone play with so screwed up balls? – I rolled my mattress up and put it on a chair under the wall.

Well, yes, as expected no one could.
Not only that dented balls jerked and jumped on the way but it was them to chose where to jump and how.
Complete chaosity excluded any aesthetic pleasure inherent in this strictly harmonized game. 
On realizing that they introduced themselves as two brothers from a neighbor village.

The information did not arise a special excitement among the students sitting along the mattress covered decking and the brothers left. 

The following day one of them, named Stepan, called me out from the canteen at the midday meal time.
As a token of gratitude for the understanding I had shown the previous night, he invited me to have a ride to his village.
We went there on his ‘Jawa’.
Stepan pulled up in front of a well-built house and asked to pretend to his parents that I had been serving with him in the army, in the Soviet troops in Germany, and now we met accidentally.

Stepan’s parents were delighted with such a chance meeting and laid the table for the comrades in arms.
After the second glass, getting in the mood, I asked Stepan if he remembered Elsa, the German blonde waitress from the Gashtet around the corner. 
Stepan was taken aback and started to look at me more closely – what if I really had been sleeping on a bank in the next koobrik?

The next day Stepan and I went on a visit to different rooms of the girl-students on their return there after the supper.
He pulled up in a room with my course-mates, but I, realizing the complete—for me— the futility of such a hunting grounds, went on alone until reached, already on the second floor of the next hostel, the last room to the left. 
It was occupied by girls from the Philological Department: Anna, Eera, Olya, and Vera with all of whom I was so very pleased to get acquainted.
And they had no other alternative but to be pleased too without dance-floors, cinemas and even a TV set nearby.

Olya, a short amiable girl with the wavy yellow bob cut hair, asked where my business card was, meaning the guitar.
I without any problems brought it from the club, sang something sentimentally romantic and passed the guitar to Olya, who suddenly wanted to learn playing it.
Meanwhile I myself sat down onto the bed of silent Eera and started up a trifling conversation where it does not matter what is being said because of what really means is following the sounds of the voice and tracing the facial expression changes and movements of the eyes.

I do not remember if it was that, or the next evening when we went out with her from the hostel – not too far away; under the yellow light from the bulb on the lamppost between the two shabby hostels, and I had what the Indians of North America call ‘a vision'. 
I saw an endless black Ukrainian night; it surrounded us from all sides and somewhere along its edges it was already buzzing with autumn cold.
The only bright spot, beside the bulb overhead, was that face opposite, smiling and not inhospitable anymore, from which the thin frequent rays of light were beaming as it happens when you squint without closing your eyes completely. 
But I did not squint at all and, maybe, even opened my eyes wider struck with the beauty of that unknown face.

And the ‘vision’ was that I saw it all from aside—even myself—and in the center so incredibly beautiful, her face.
Like a circle of light in the darkness around us.
The lifebuoy, which will help to withstand the threatening rumble from the far horizon and whistling of icy winds.

(...I did not think all this lofty rubbish, of course, and, in fact, I was not thinking at all, I just looked at her face and fell in love more and more…) 

The next day she did not come to the canteen for the midday meal.
Vera said that Eera was on duty – cleaning the room.
The moment I came up to the dilapidated building of the hostel, she went out on the porch with a mop in her hands, in a short gown.

(...the most conventional method for estimating female beauty and attractiveness is assessing the volumes.
Experts and connoisseurs base their evaluation on the volume of the breasts and hinderlands.
Gourmets measure, subtractively, the waist…
Absolute dilettantism.
But what else to expect from all those differently aged junior bums?

The most captivating part of a woman with which she will hook you at once and forever is her knees.
If when you look at them your heart gets warm, your shoulders straighten up, your breath goes deeper, then be sure – this is it, nothing more beautiful will ever be met. 
If that does not happen, go away and be on the look-out, maybe luck will be good to you…) 

Seeing her knees I immediately realized that I was right in raising my paws and making dumb remarks about the boots size, because on the wet trail through the corn jungle under her blue jeans were those very knees.

You, of course, have guessed already, that it was your mother.

Thus, before your birth, there remained three more years. 
Such a stretch is quite sufficient for dying away of at least two loves, according to calculations of the reverend Sigmund Freud.

(...such a profanation of the dogma’s sanctity, eh? 
This silly attack is easy to parry with the trick of ‘terz’ – saying, that there are no rules without exceptions.
It depends on the rules, though.

If a certain scientist Galileo, dropping balls from the Tower of Pisa would have noticed that one of them, marked, for the exception's sake, with ‘S + E' suddenly started to soar and deliver aerobatics tricks, then there would be no law of universal gravitation. 
And on that account, our old good Ziggy cannot be considered a stubborn die-hard scientist.

He should be transferred to another league.
Put him in the rank of such illustrious coryphaei as Charles Perrault, Hans Cristian Andersen and so on, up to the nameless creators of the Thousand and One Nights. 
There he would fit perfectly with his Tom Thumb, aka ‘ego’, Evil Giant, aka ‘super-ego’, the royal castle of ‘consciousness’, and impenetrable wilds of tropical marches and jungles of ‘subconsciousness’, on the canvas of which he weaves lacy patterns of his theory.

How dare I?!
So many generations have been conceived and, in their turn, conceived further generations with the blessing and protection of his psychoanalysis!

Nature does not tolerate emptiness, man necessarily has to fill with something their gray matter, aka brain, aka the ‘highest fucking matter', using the apt expression of the marasmus-driven Battalion Commander of VSO-11. 

And that's the indisputable truth. 
Nothing but intolerance to emptiness caused the production of all those Bibles-Korans-Vedas-Iliads as well as belief in the existence of brownies. 

And, obedient to the naive wisdom of nature we stop flogging the empty bullshit—it's not pedagogically right—and went on to bring into the picture the three years until you condescend to be born…) 

In the girls' room everything was determined, that is everybody had already got it to who I was coming to. 
Olya abandoned her idea of learning to play the guitar, but I all the same never took it back to the club.
Just in case.
So that I would have an excuse to come again, like, oh, I forgot here something.
Protective measures are not redundant when your girlfriend is being told: 
‘Don’t you know, he’s married?!’

I did not deny the presence of such a fact in my biography, but that was already behind, in the abyss of the past. 
And she did not even check my passport!.

That evening a young teacher from the Philology Department came into the room.
Probably, to make sure she had checked what was going on there at all.
Because apart from me, one more lover started his visits to the room – Czech Jan.

A natural Czech, middle-aged man, who arrived within the framework of socialist integration of the fraternal states to show the Bolshevik, that was not just a village but also the hops production state farm of the same name, how to dry the hops harvested by students to get the right beer.
Czechs and beer are twin brothers.

Jan’s wife stayed to keep their children in the Czech Republic.
He missed her and, to relieve the longing, fell in love with Olya.
He began to come in the evenings, talked with her about something – I’m not sure what about because he talked in Czech.
And if it were not for the language barrier, I would ask him about the year 68. 

Once they had a party in the room, so he came even in a necktie, that’s a civilized man for you.
He brought a bottle of Champagne for the occasion and canned food, but not from the store because the canned food turned out more delicious than even the cod liver after which you had to go to Moscow or Leningrad.
And he refused to drink vodka.
Showing at the filled glass he wrinkled his face and patted himself on the heart – to say, I have incompatibility with this swill.

But when the teacher came on her supervisory visit, Jan was not present in the room.
She saw that though Eera and I were sitting on the same bed but in a quite appropriate attitude – each one at the opposite back of it. 
All moral prescriptions respected, please, get seated, let's have a cup of tea. 

And that moment in the corridor – ta-dah! 
You! Who! Mother! Bluther!
The door of the room burst wide open.
And in the dark corridor, five or six guys were looming in two ranks. 

The teacher turned around from the table,
‘What’s happening?’
‘And who are you here at all?’
She decided to suppress them with her authority. 
‘Girls! Tell them who I am!’
And all four girls, in one voice, as if in the collective recital that they had been preparing from their kindergarten times: 
‘She-Is-a-Teacher!!’
And in response:
‘And fuck her!’

Well, yes. Not all of our youth are brought up properly.
And not only in the rural areas.

During that matinee dialogue I, of course, realized that they had come after my soul.

The evening before a girl from the next hostel came running to the club dormitory with complaints that local guys were misbehaving in their room.
I, of course, ran there and saw a scene of confusion on the first floor. 
Some girl was crying, three local guys were confronted with three student guys and wrangling on the subject ‘and who are you?’
In short, a stalemate position. 

To solve the etude, I chose the bigger guy among the locals and asked the crying girl:
‘This one offended you?’
‘Yes!’
I punched the guy. 
The locals disappeared. 
The conflict solved.

Then that guy and two more with him waited for me at the entrance to the club.
‘It was not me,’ he said.
‘I’m sorry,’ said I. ‘I had no choice.’
How could I explain to him that I was trained by the Chief of Staff – a fact of violation should be followed but the fact of punishment?
Only the Chief of Staff—which is characteristic—did not ask me for forgiveness.

But, apparently, my apology was not excepted and the guys had come to show the Bolshevik style vendetta.

I fished from under the bed an empty champagne bottle and stood in front of the doorway.
They kept barking but abstained from stepping in – the bottle looked heavy.
How could they know that my martial art level was less than a fig with minus? 

Some footsteps sounded in the corridor and behind the guys I made out Stepan.
He grasped at once what was what and struck from the rear.
I also jumped out into the corridor with the battle cry:
‘Come fucking here!’
It worked no worse than on Shoorik – the guys flinched and fled.

Stepan and I were adding stimulation to them but I hadn’t the bottle in my hands.
I don’t remember where it had gone.
I remember only their united clatter down the stairs with Stepan racing after them.
I was left alone with the one who lingered upstairs but his spirit was broken and he limply slouched over the railing of the upper landing and sagged there like a wet mat.
He no longer resisted, just hang on the railing and looked down at the wooden steps where he was to plop.

And I grabbed him – noblesse oblige! – but then I heard a cry; very distant, hardly audible, like the one that called me on the snowy road near the nine-story building in Stavropol. 
I looked at the submissive jelly of a guy.
What for?
I turned around and went down the corridor back to the room.

(...I agree it's all more than strange, but strange things happen sometimes. 
Some people hear voices, but I heard calls…)

Again she did not come to the midday meal.
I went to their room.
She was sitting alone and did not want to talk.
I sat on the bed by her side, took her hand.
I liked that hand and fingers – long and tapering.
I only did not like the whitish narrow scars on the wrist, like, from an adolescent suicide attempt, but I never asked about them.
And that moment too I asked only what’s wrong.

She sobbed and said that in the morning on the plantation the senior overseer was putting her to shame.
He told it was unworthy of a teacher’s daughter to have anything in common with such a renegade and married man as I was.
And that he would call her mother and tell her everything the moment we returned to Nezhin.
But what was there to tell of?
And of which teacher mother?
‘Of Germaaaaa..’ and she burst into tears.
‘Damn them all, then! Come with me!’
‘Where?’

As if I knew where, but she agreed and we went.
At first, it was a field of corn, but not the one over which we had been walking from the buses. 
The stalks much shorter and rare.

Then the field slanted and we came at a secluded long stack of straw. 
The day was warm and clear.
We lay on the straw that broke out of the stack from one side, talking, kissing.

I wanted to open to her my whole soul; even about the fact, that I was a space cadet.
And I wanted her so badly, only the sun was in the way.
But with the approach of the evening, the solitude disappeared. 
Next to the stack there stretched a dirt road.
Some trucks and motorcycles started to pass by and stare at her red sweater.

We returned in the dark and were met by Anna waiting for us near the hostel with a warning not to go up to the room because of there was an ambush there. 
She also told the senior overseer teacher screamed and shouted in their room than both of us ignored coming to work but were seen strolling around and that the dean offices of our both department together with the rector would be informed about it. 

Olya, Vera and Jan also joined us for a decision making session: what to do?
Jan shook his head and kept repeating in Czech, which had grown more understandable already, that ‘it is-a not-a good-a’.
Olya cried out at him to better shut up and go to the canteen and bring something to eat for us. 
Because of only he could do it without evoking unwanted suspicions.
Olya and Jan understood each other without translation and he soon returned with a newspaper parcel for the hunted-after ‘milivitsi’.

I did not know that I was that hungry.
Soon there was drawn a plan for the campaign of persecuted students against oppressor-teachers.
Eera and I would go to Borzna, the native town of Vera, and stay for the night at Vera’s parents hutta.
In the morning Eera would go to Nezhin as if she had gone there two days before being unwell, and I would come back to Bolshevik as if coming from Konotop and not knowing anything whatsoever about what the fuss. 
Czech Jan saw the two of us to the road out of the village still preaching about ‘lovely pretty milovitsy’ and we left into the night.

The night was dark and windy and the road all potholes and longer than ten kilometers from the approximate estimation by Vera.
Eera got very tired, at the end, I even humped her on top of me, like Gogol's Homa Brut the witch, from one roadside post to the next. 
Eera had been already on a visit to Vera's parents’ hutta and found it even in the dead of night.

Parents of Vera bedded us on the floor in the living room and promised to wake Eera up for the seven o'clock bus to Nezhin. 
We lay down and to my embrace, Eera said that she was too tired and had to get up early. 
She was asleep at once.
And I lay awake still for a long time and silently gloated that we had rubbed the senior overseer’s nose in it.
No trumps? No ace? Grab my dick and wipe your face!

When I awoke in the morning Eera was gone and Vera's brother took me to Bolshevik on his ‘Jawa'. 
Students and teachers were just coming out of the canteen and he, cracking his motor, carried me along the crowd in the slow triumphant ride. 
 A certain stupid asshole stood with his jaw dropped.

Only Vera's brother got disappointed when I replied to him that I and Eera hadn't had it on the floor of their living room. 
