
She stayed in Nezhin for a long time and I again got under the influence of my image.

Three men from Borzna came to conduct a stretch of running water. 
The half inch pipe in a knee-deep trench.
I was going by and helped them a little because of nothing better to do.
They got emotional and bought some vodka, but without a snack.
A throwaway kitchen oilcloth was spread under a cherry tree, we sat on it with our feet lowered into the trench for comfort and killed the bottle. 
And then the senior overseer came up to witness a shameful fact that I again instead of work was drinking drastically and he’d let me have it as soon as we were in Nezhin.

While the youngest of the mujiks went to the store after a catch-on addition, I dropped in at the plantation. 
My course-mate girls started to speak up that I did not notice my own and keep company only with the girls from the Philology Department.
I told them I was a Slavophil since early childhood and anglofac's beef to heels did not excite me, in short – philfac forever! 

Then the mujiks called me from the trench.
We finished the extra bottle too, with a pair of doughnuts for a snack, and I passed away on the same tablecloth.
Like, enjoy our specialty dessert…

Later, the senior overseer in his accusatory speech focused on the fact, that the students on their way from the plantation had to pass by me in such a served-up form.
Although the distance between the road and the trench was about five meters, I was still ashamed to hear about it.
But that was later.

Three days after Vera went to Borzna and I accompanied her to make a telephone call to Eera in Nezhin.
‘Hi.’
‘Hi.’
‘How d’you?’
‘Nothing.’
‘You… well… come… eh? I wrote you a song.’
And what else could be expected from someone like me?

Actually, I did not write a song but made a Russian adaptation of the then-popular song ‘It's raining, it's pouring (you might be sorry)...' 

‘The weary whisper of an endless rain
Drowned hopes of seeing you again, 
Dripping drops with their low drone
make me feel forlorn and lone
and drive me mad with their stance:
‘You can be happy only once!’

What’s the use of all you weeping, rain?
Keep it back, don’t spend on me in vain
Let the wind dry up your tears
With a swarm of fallen leaves
I don’t need any preaching rains
They can’t bring back my happy days...’

Zampolit wouldn’t approve that it again was about the rain, but so was the original and the song itself had a cool harmony.

Coming back with Vera we didn’t go along the road but took a shortcut over the fields that she was familiar with.
There was some secluded hole nearby the path, like a former dugout all overgrown with the grass and we entered it for a rest. 
Vera was a beautiful black-haired girl of a dark complexion and commanding air. 
When she got fed up with my incessant babbling about Eera this, Eera that, we went on.
Getting out of the hole I noticed candy wrappers in the grass.
It seemed to be a local dating house where I failed to live up to my image.

Many years later Eera told me how one of the long evenings in Bolshevik before I got to their room, they arranged shaman dances behind the closed door. 
Vera hung a piece of sausage and a pair of onions from her sports trousers.
And she jumped in that disguise: uh! Uh!

(...those swarthy Slav females would out-sex anyone when left on their own and here lies the clue to the music of Igor Stravinsky…)

Eera arrived and I spent the night in their room.
It happened all by itself.
We lay dressed on her bed and kept hugging and pressing tighter and closer to each other, and then there was nowhere more so.
Only I did not want to creak the bed like Marc and Katranikha and it somehow…

(...Anna did not sleep and later told Eera that one moment she couldn’t control herself an kissed her own forearm…)

...but I still liked it.

Next day Eera confessed to me:
‘I seem have overcome the psychological barrier.' 
‘I kinda thought the physical too...' 

After Olya had refused to marry Jan, he instantly grew Russian. 
The pain from the unanswered love stripped him of the varnish of civilization.
He never learned the language but he stopped shaving and walked around in bristles and a black padded jacket from under which he took a bottle of vodka—at uneven intervals—and swallowed from its neck like validol or some other medication.
Homeopathy in Bolshevik style.

On the last evening before our departure from the village, Vera with a lot of care prepared a bed for me and Eera in the next room, which had already been vacated.
I did not turn off the light and Eera later told me she got appalled by the sight of what with I was getting on top of her.

In the morning, before the arrival of the buses, she hardly talked to me – ‘yes’, ‘no’, ‘nothing’.
I did not manage then to get it out of her, that it was the result of Olya's admonition that all we had had there was just a ‘collective farm affair' and back in Nezhin, I would not even look at Eera. 

When the buses came I boarded neither of them but put the guitar over my shoulder and walked towards the forest belt along the Moscow highway on the distant horizon to go hiking to Baturin and from there to Konotop.

‘They say, you’ve had an affair with a teacher’s daughter?’
‘They say, you’ve got married?’
Yes, she had and now came to Nezhin to get aright some papers and dropped into Room 72 on the third floor of the Hosty before leaving for Mongolia where they sent her husband after graduating his military school. 

By the by, he realized she was not a virgin.
After the first wedding night he asked, well, they say, that women, usually, as if were comparing… 
‘Yes, that’s true,’ she answered and didn’t add a word to it.

(...that’s how she fucking crushed the poor fool.
Just stepped on and smeared away.
Instead of comforting with a word of affection: you're my hero, dear, yes, no one's fit to hold a candle by you... 
Women are the most ruthless creatures if you ask me. 
And should we then be much surprised at having Tughriks among us?..)

However, sometimes it’s better to make love than talking.
And we lay on the former Fyodor's and now my bed because it was by the window. 
The first and only time in my life I was with a married woman.
And that’s just for the old sakes’ sake.

When we got dressed and hugged goodbye each other, she exclaimed twice:
‘I’m a whore!’
Yes, and with so happy a voice too.
Like, Archimedes in his famous jogging after a bath.
‘Eureka! I found myself and know what I’ll do in Mongolia!’’
Farewell, Nadya.
Whatever and anyway, you’re the most cloudless love of my life…

The senior overseer kept true his threats concerning me.

Again there was a general meeting of the English Department with the agenda to ask the Institute authorities to send me down.
The day before it, on Veerich’s advice, I called the meeting of my course-mates – well, of those living in the Hosty –in Room 72 to rally the ranks, so to say.

Veerich was a current four-year student who also entered the Institute after the army service.

They crowded in, were sitting on each other – all girls, except for Igor and Volodya.
I wouldn’t have supposed that such a swarm could fit in our pencil-box room.
I had to perch on the window sill.
It was some rally of supporters!

They came together united with one purpose – to admire me crushed, pulled out of my image, crucified on the window sill.
Their saliva was dripping even from their eyes like by those public execution goers.
They came to lynch me beforehand without waiting for the general meeting because in Bolshevik I had turned nose up at our Department girls.
Because of the unforgivable slogan ‘philfac forever!’

One of the girls even accused me of saying her something eye-to-eye which she wouldn’t forget until her last day and never forgive me that.
She even quenched a sob when telling her sad story.
Everybody rushed to inquire – what words were they? – but she only blew her nose and repeated her oath to carry them with her to the grave.
Even I got intrigued – what kind of so indelible words I could know?

Moreover, until that moment it never occurred to me she was from my course; I swear – I saw her for the first time!
Then I got tired of that Lynch trial session.
‘Okay,’ said I, ‘many thanks for your kind support but I still have to prepare my homework for tomorrow classes.’
Irina from Bakhmach almost choked with chortling.

At the meeting, after the overseer's declamation, a couple of my course-mates took the floor to confirm, that, yes, I went to work only when I wanted to and shamelessly slept on an oilcloth. 

Then Veerich made an attempt to break the monotonous mood.
He leaned on the lectern in front of the audience and began to broadcast what kind of a reliable comrade and friend I was and recently rescued a couple of freshman girls who had been subjected to hooligan harassment in the Count's Park. 
I bravely rushed at the villains although one of them had a neck from a broken bottle in his hands.

Veerich stepped out from behind the lectern and demonstrated the audience how to properly hold the neck in your hand and commented that such a weapon was more dangerous than a simple knife.
The audience froze in awed attention to the disclosed details. 

On the whole, he did not deviate too much.
That day Slavik and Twoik ran up to me from the hostel lobby.
There was a first-year student, they said, in a fit of hysterics.
Some guys had stopped her girlfriend in the park and were keeping her there.
The three of us raced to the indicated place and shooed off the locals.
And the saved beauty started to scream her guts out that we had ruined her personal life.
It seemed one of the would-be rapists had become her target.
Damn! Don’t call me anymore to save a twat gone hunting!

However, the detail with the bottle neck was brooded in the course of Veerich’s fantasy flight.
In the end, I was given the floor. 
‘Everyone is forging his own destiny.
Here is mine, white-hot, right from the forge and now it depends on you how it will turn out...’

Then I gave out a repentance a la Marc Novoselitsky at the meeting on behalf of the Game of Parties and with a minimal margin – who's for? against? abstained? – I received a severe reprimand with the final note of warning. 

(...although the outcome of the meeting was clear before it even started – if I were kicked out then where would you come from?
Certain shell-fragments just have to fly amiss…)

Every good news has some crappy lining.
Hardly had I time to rejoice that sending down whizzed harmlessly past, as I had again to stick my neck into the hateful noose. 
The KGB captain had beaconed with his newspaper – it's time to report and get instructions. 

At the meeting, it turned out that I became a hand-me-down at their enterprise. 
The captain for his heroism and vigilance displayed during the Game of Parties was encouraged by the rise from the provincial backwoods to the capital city of Kiev.
He did not hide his joy passing me as a stock-in-trade to his successor.

The successor was a black-haired young man who had just graduated from some institute in Chernigov at the Historical Department of which they were forging Party Cadres.
After that Department you weren’t sent to a village to work off your diploma, you got a position no lower than at a District Party Committee and then – grow up in your career to become a Member of the Political Bureau of the CPSU Central Committee, if your health conditions and aptness at making right choice would have it.
But not everyone is able to graduate that Department.

Two students from the Philology Department at NGPI got transferred there and a month later they blew off all the career prospects and returned back.
The discipline at that Historical Department was like that in a cadet school.
If at the lecturer's entering the classroom you did not stand at attention, then the group headman, also a student, would get at you like a construction battalion ‘pheasant' at a newly drafted ‘salaga'. 
And in the hostel, all kept strict to the rules and peeking after each other to catch pants down and knock on. 
After all, there were district committees and District Committees; one could be in a muddy district center, another in the capital city. 
A classic example of the struggle for survival – the more competitors you outlive, the harder it is to outlive you...

That young black-haired KGB man had a long sheepskin coat and did not inquire the price of mine. 
And he was much more mobile than the promoted captain, or maybe he just did not have time yet to get lazy.
He arranged meetings with me at various city institutions.
For instance, in ZAGS closed after a working day, or in the Tourism Bureau.

One time it was in an empty apartment on the fourth floor of a five-story building not far from the main square.
He brought with him his new boss to that meeting.
Once upon a time, they called a male of that boss's looks ‘an interesting man’ – gray hair in a clean cut above a youthful well-tanned face.
A European gloss was felt at once.
I don’t know what for he was transferred from Hungary to the provincial backwoods of Nezhin where he got interested in a rat whose finking helped his predecessor in promotion to Kiev.
However, I couldn't serve a springboard for him either. 
Enough was enough.
I had got fed up with that shit.

The black-haired almost cried from my invariable report that the current student youth was an amorphous mass thinking only about how much lard was left in their ‘torbas’.
The playful times of gamey gossip were over. 

But he had so irrepressible desire to dig something out that even send his secret collaborator to Room 72 in case I was a double agent and kept an underground printing house under my bed.

Of course, that seksot did not introduce himself as a rat with the pseudonym ‘Vova’ but I still figured it out.
Would a normal student from the Physics and Mathematics Department ask me for help with his English?
Taking into consideration my image?
Phooey!
The shammer drove a fool about living in the same hostel with me. 
Okay, bro! No problem!

 So, here he comes.
I hospitably encourage him to take a seat on a freshman’s bed and call the exercise number from the textbook he has brought with him.
He starts doing the exercise. 
Now I can return to the table with the players of started ‘pool’ of Preferans around it.
And what will he sneak into his notebook for his report to the KGB man: ‘seven spades’, ‘trick’, ‘pass’, ‘miser’?

At those times the Ministry of Health had not yet started to print its warning on cigarette packs.
The tobacco smoke floated in Room 72 in slowly tumbling layers.
The non-smoker Phys-Mat guy learned from his severe exposure that the stool-pigeoning was hazardous for health. 
It took him two visits to make sure that, yes, the student body was absolutely amorphous – just two kopecks for a trick.

But one time the young KGBist dictated me a report about Zhomnir.
There was nothing compromising in it, just that on such and such a day, at such and such an hour Zhomnir was coming out from the language laboratory. 
Well, the language laboratory was not a safe house and contained just the laboratory assistant at her desk and a swarm of freshmen behind the glass doors in the booth parroting the tape-recorded texts 'Meet the Parkers' from the headphones on their heads.
An absolutely inappropriate place for disseminating of the Ukrainian nationalism. 

I guess, the dictation was done just in case, after the KGB man found out that I was visiting Zhomnir at home to discuss my translations for ‘Translator’ which I never cut ties with.
Such a piece of paper could always come handy.
‘A familiar hand, isn’t it, Alexander Vasilyevich?’

My last mission was to get acquainted with an American.
There was a ten-day USA Agricultural Exhibition in Kiev and I was instructed to visit it and endeavor to make friends with at least someone from their staff.

I took Slavik with me and we whizzed by a local train to Kiev and there to the grounds of the Republican VeDeeNKHa with the exhibition in a huge hangar. 
Live Americans were then a rare phenomenon.
You could hardly tolter squeezed in the crow more dense than to the Lenin Mausoleum on the Red Square in Moscow, or in a traveling menagerie in Konotop on a Sunday day.

On entering the hangar you saw a huge portrait of US President Jimmy Carter with best wishes to the Soviet people, and the crowd carried you further along the shiny barriers with compartments on both sides – farm tractors, machines, pictures of happy rural life.
In one small section there stood a dummy pig, very nice, painted with large flower all over in style of the Beatles cartoon ‘Yellow Submarine’.
And next to the ornamented piggy there was a girl, alive.
Not my style, though, if you did not know she was an American you wouldn’t give her another look.
So, she stood by and repeated like a clockwork:
‘This is a piglet! This is a piglet!’
And her stare already dim and glassy, stunned with that rumbling crowd flowing past her for hours, like some Niagara Falls.
And no response from the waves of strange faces.
I pitied her, slowed down and said:
‘Call it ‘porosyonok’.’
‘This is a piglet! This is a piglet!’

(...at that time the two great nations were not yet prepared for a dialogue…)

I and Slavik went out of the hangar and sparked in the dank spring wind of the Republican VeDeeNKHa. 
And I reported to the black-haired that those Americans were too introvert.
He realized that both ‘introvert’ and ‘amorphous’ stuff was not the right thing for building his career up and grew sad.

That mission was the last one because of soon after I dug a hole for myself to fall in.

The black-haired already made me tired with his insolent demands to write a report and not to just play with the word order.
And there popped up something to make him happy without harming people...

In the institute reading hall, on the second floor of the New Building, I was leafing through a biography of Bogdan Khmelnitsky when on one of the pages I saw a mark in pencil ‘Bogdan Khmelnitsky is a traitor to the Ukrainian people'. 
I reported it in my next report to the KGB.
The guy was delighted – calling the initiator of the Ukraine and Russia reunion a traitor visibly smelled with the Ukrainian nationalism.
‘On which page?’
‘Well, somewhere in the middle.’

So, they arrested the book, found the unlawful page and at the following meeting:
‘But it was you who wrote that.’
‘What?!’
‘The hand is yours, that’s what. No use of denying. You’d better confess.’
And he started to intimidate me with a full-scale expertise.
Two weeks later he explained that the letter ‘a’ in the pencil inscription was very like to mine but a little different.
So the graphologist told him.
And—which is characteristic—he did not even apologize. 

In general, I, like, got offended and stopped to turn up for the loathsome datings no matter how diligently he flashed his semaphore newspaper. 
And at chance meetings in the city transport, I was cutting him dead with a disinterested indifference of a stranger. 
He seemed to understand that such a secret collaborator is as beneficial as two aces in the kitty when playing a miser in Preferans and pissed off.

So in the KGB archives there ceased to accumulate the reports with my handwriting signed as ‘Pavel'. 

(...yes, but now I have to rewind it – who were Slavik and Twoik?..)


They entered my life at the Hosty to replace Fyodor and Yasha.
First-year students.
Slavik was from Chernigov, he enrolled English Department and even lived in the same room with me.

He had also served in a construction battalion, but belonging to a well-to-do society stratum granted him a position in charge of a warehouse.
I mean he came from a family wealthy enough for keeping successful negotiations with the Commanders of his military unit.
And he also was drafted into a construction battalion because of some sight problems which he hid behind the half-dark lenses in his glasses.
The long forelock of straight chestnut hair slid across his forehead – from edge to edge. 
He did not shave the upper lip, saving soft female tendrils trimmed with scissors.

He, who has passed the school of construction battalion, does not need an explanation for the look of all-forgiveness and all-comprehension in the optics of his roommate returning from a walk in the Count's Park. 
A former conbatist will find in himself enough of determination to ask a direct question and, after a direct answer, to ask for it.
In circles of the enlightened, it is called ‘clinging to the tail'. 
The grass cemented us and made, practically, inseparable.

I remember the case of a winter suction when right in the middle of the week I decided to go to Konotop, by 3:15 local train there, by 19:05 back. 
So Slavik kept me company, that’s what a loyal friend is.

In Konotop we went to Lyalka who asked me if I remembered that bustard on a visit from St. Petersburg.
How not to remember?
I liked his shoes then: so heavy, one could see at once that sturdy. 
Lyalka had been conquering the visitor with the breadth of a lifestyle of our provincial backwater. 
He took the Petersburger to his section in the basement where the grass was reaching the condition; we sparked there – not bad it was, some grass for high flights.

‘So that bitch,' said Lyalka, 'two days ago bombed my basement. Broke the door and took it out. 
Seryoga the King saw him at the station getting on the Leningrad train with a backpack.’

Yea, that's what you call a clean work because St. Pete had always been the cultural capital of our country. 

In short, Lyalka forked out a couple of heads but with the warning that their quality hadn't been tested yet. 
I, just in case, dropped on Decemberists 13 and found one or two twigs in the attic of the brick shed.

On the back train, it became completely unbearable and in the car vestibule, I stuffed a joint of Lyalka's donation while Slavik represented a make-believe screen around me with his fur hat on top. 
We sparked it right there, smoked, entered the car and sat on the benches opposite each other.
He looked at me, I looked at him.
In the hope, so to speak, maybe it’s just that I didn’t have time enough to get it.
But it's all bullshit. 
If you start to cultivate wishful expectations of that sort then the stuff has no more dose than clippings from a kitchen broom.

We arrived at Nezhin.
Glum and dismal.
By the time we reached the Hosty it was completely dark.
But, just in case, we walked to the Old Building.
Night. Desolation. Winter.
I stuffed one from the grabbed at the attic.
Sparked it.
Slavik was standing by but manly restrained himself.
I took another drag and said:
‘Slavik,’ said I,
(...and from the marble plaque on the corner of the Old Building with the inscription “N. V. Gogol studied here...” my own words echoed back to me…)
‘It’s not in vain, that we have ridden three horses to death today.’
And I passed the joint into his craving claw...
