
As for Twoic, he actually was Sasha from Bakhmach. 
I named him ‘Eternal-Two-Getter' because ‘two' was the poorest mark for school kids, but then the handle was shortened to Twoic. 
He responded with handling me the 'Phooey-Pricker' derived from my half-tabooed warcry with which I answered any kickbacks in life:
'We’ll prick through any phooey!’

Actually, he was not from Bakhmach but from a village adjacent to it.
On that account, he preferred to play a role of a naive child of nature and a simpleton peasant. 
His parent provided him with ample grub, collecting a generous ‘torba’ each weekend when he started back to Nezhin.
All in all, it was a bulky farm boy.

A man's nature is best expressed in their laugh.
Twoic did it so:
A sharp yank up of his broad face to chortle out two-three squeaks with his eyes shut followed by slow lowering of the face back and, on the way, the pin-sharp pupils would frisk through the porthole of his squint checking the current situation: what and how?
Just so a recklessly cautious character...

He studied at the Biology Department and, therefore lived on the second (biofac's) floor of the Hosty.
He also was a ‘tail-clinger’ but not as keen as Slavic.

The main factor that made us into a trinity was Preferans.
A great game, if you take a look.
Poker, Snore, King or its reduced version – Eralush, are just contests for actor skills.
Preferans is an intellectual game of mind.
Only I had a constant bad luck at it...

I tried to break that tendency and tame the fortune and because of that, I kept taking desperate risks.
‘Bluish’ misers were the trademark of Phooey-Pricker.
Clearly realizing that because of the crimson tablecloth stolen from the redheaded dembel, I had fallen out of grace by Luck, I tried to overcome that status quo whatever the costs and grab anew the fortune’s forelock.
As a result, getting two or three ‘throw-ins' or even a ‘train' of them at playing a regular ‘bluish' miser, I sat in an indifferent and languid prostration until the end of the ‘pool of 40' in progress. 

I was paid a student scholarship of 45 rubles a month.
Almost every weekend my mother gave me 10 rubles before I left for Nezhin.
All the money went on my card debts, well, plus the havvage at the Canteen. 
The tall bottles with dry wine forsook me.
I switched to a healthy way of sober life.
Although being constantly washed-out was f-f.. flaming bending me out of shape.

Besides, Twoic and Slavik played ‘on one paw’, that is as a team, having conspired, which means forget the hope that your seconded King, or Queen with two cards, will ever bring you a trick. 
United efforts of two players ‘on one paw’ would strip the third one of a trick, or of a chip at 50% of the games in a pool.
Such is the law – severe, but just.
There are no bros at cards.
Shut up your driveling gape when among friends.

(...of course, you do not need to understand all this Preferans-terminology, but, to get the feel, imagine a couple of muggers working in a minibus: one holds the victim’s hands while the other rummages the pockets and pulls money out.
The difference, though, is that you won’t take the same minibus seeing them on it while with the Preferans you will come up to them next day and say:
‘Well, will we ‘draw a pool’ or will we?’
On their conspiracy, I was directly told years after the graduation…) 

Of course, I noticed their ‘one-paw pedal system’ of scratching one or the other eyebrow and pulling oneself behind the earlobe under the guise of reflexive body movements but I did not care a damn.
I was playing against my fate and did not care if it used them both as for its pawns in our gambling.

Knowing that they ‘play’ at Room 72, Preferans players from other Departments also came to us.
With those, I was breaking even.
I would have stayed in the win but for the adamant propensity for unreliable—‘bluish'—misers. 

In addition to partnership in cards, Twoic became a source of useful acquaintances.
A pair of cute, educated gays from the locals paid a couple of visits to our room.
One of them told ‘pinky’ jokes.
‘So, get, you nasty fascist, a grenade from a Soviet homosexual!’
He funnily and accurately conveyed the ‘pinky’ intonations.

And Dr. Grisha told how visiting the beach of Golden Sands in Bulgaria he screened his partner ripping off a golden watch from the clothes left on the sand by an Englishman taking a swim in the sea.
We laughed again.

No, Twoic was not gay.
I hadn’t seen a single one at the institute.
What’s the point?
To pass the examination and land among a group of girls?
So they just flashed by like a funny episode.

But Dr. Grisha was useful indeed.
Once he arranged a twelve-day sick leave for me; wrote somewhat bronchitis in the diagnosis.
Such a cute little man.
He had a very beautiful hair, though the word ‘hair’ wouldn’t suit it, I’d better say – a wavy chevelure.
And he was handsome of face, only that a little short.
But his brown soft briefcase was large, as well as his hips which he rolled in his gait. 
I was on quite friendly terms with him, despite the difference in orientation. 
Nothing like in case with Tughrik.
By the way, Dr. Grisha was also married and had two children; boys both of them...

And a three-day leave for acute respiratory disease, aka ARD, I could procure and without Dr. Grisha.
Behind the Old Building there stood one-story institute medical center.
You come here in the morning before classes and they give you a thermometer and, if there is the temperature, you get a stamped paper for ARD and three days of freedom. 
Only you need to warn the headman-girl of your group not to smear the log with ‘absent' marks, in three days she'll have the reference. 

Twoic, as a biology specialist, said that the temperature significantly rises in the strained muscles area.
And the armpit is a bunch of muscles.
Placing a thermometer in there, I started to rapidly strain and relax that area muscles under the clothes until the doctor, handled Pill, would say: 
‘Enough!’
And the result was never less than 37.3 degrees C. 

My falling ill so often perplexed Pill, where was my immune system?
Later on, her bewilderment transformed into angry suspicion and she started to check me with two thermometers at once, one for each armpit.
So the difference was only one-tenth: 37.3 and 37.2 – all the same ARD. 

And then Pill went amok.
‘Enough! Here’s a referral for you – go to the hospital!’
But I did not retreat and went there and lay in the hospital for a week and a half, for no reason, actually, just for the principle's sake...

With all that in mind, don’t forget about my main occupation – the studying.

I was sitting in the practical classes of my group, at times attended lectures for the whole course students, passed credits and examinations.
Besides, I never dropped self-education. 

In the second year, I was fortunate enough to meet ‘The Cavalry Army' and ‘The Odessa Stories' by Ivan Babel. 
He convinced me that even after the Revolution there remained writers in Russia and not just sholokhovs-proskurins-markovs.

On the third course, in the institute reading hall, I found magazines with ‘The Master and Margarita' by Bulgakov. 
It was a thunderstrike. 

In the final year, the endless, like the flow of the Nile, Thomas Mann’s ‘Joseph and his Brothers’ were attending the institute to keep me company through the long lecture hours.

I don't account for commonplace pulp fictions not related to my education that was read for a pastime. 
Say, there’s a stir in the Hosty:
‘Ah, Efremov! ‘Thais of Athens’! The peak and limit of the wildest dreams!’

Ilya Lipes gave that hetaera to me for two days.
I even had to go, after the midnight lights-out, in the corridor and read under the lamp above the doors to the washroom and the men’s toilet.
I was sitting in a chair dragged along, with my sheepskin coat thrown over the shoulders but not covering my bare legs, because I was too lazy to dress after reading in bed before the curfew. 
So what? Let them imagine I was on the beach...

But with all due respect to Lipes, that's not literature but just an illustration from the textbook ‘The History of the Ancient World’ for the fifth grade of secondary school.
When a schoolboy, I liked those colorful pictures of the Egypt slaves dragging stone blocks to the pyramids, of Roman legions on their march and the such like masterpieces.
Some gaudy means of education, no denying, yet comics strips and literature are not the same. 

However, you cannot know beforehand where a find might be awaiting you, and where a loss.
Sitting there, under the dark frozen window behind my back, with my eyes running over the lines describing an ancient festival where stark naked participants had a ritual ran through the night darkness, I had a vision again.
Just for a fraction of a second I got into a dark Greek night and ran completely naked in the shade of black trees under the big wet stars in the sky... 
But then – flick! – and I was back again in the sheepskin coat on a chair between the fluorescent lamp in the ceiling and the gray concrete floor stretched away into the darkness of the corridor in the fast asleep hostel, and my body still tense from that pair of hasty step-jumps in my run through that split-second, and my skin still feeling the chill of night from that distant past...

(...and what to do with all that?
Just do as everyone else – brush it aside, forget and live on.
But the book itself was, all the same, a sheer garbage…)

No better garbage were all those lectures: Theorgrammatics, Theorophonics, Scientific Communism, Aesthetics…

Although, I can understand, in part, the lecturers who poured them out; once upon a time they had to learn all that shit themselves.
And now, on the basis of the past sufferings, they tormented us, students, because of their personal dissatisfaction with so crappy life design.

‘Welcome to my glossed perineum,
The seat of fanciful zygotes...’

However, I even happened to like one of the theoretical lectures on… grammar?.. phonetics?. 
Well, in short, Scnar it was delivering it to us.
That’s only that he had such a last name, but he himself was a good guy.
When I was going to be locked up in the city hospital he lent me ‘The Quiet American’ by Graham Green, in English.
I'd hardly survive that week there alone because the neighbor patient in the ward made the window curtains to bubble with his snoring.

Before that lecture, when on a weekend in Konotop I visited Lyalka.
He wasn’t home and his brother Rabetus warmed me up.
I had never seen such grass yet.
Like, some thin dry skeleton of tiny twigs. 
And never had I had such a drag.
I saw Rabentus as if through a lens: his top and bottom narrow and the middle stretched. 
He noticed that I was dragged beyond the limits, advised to rinse my mug with the water from the tap. 
No use.
But I remembered that I still had to go to Nezhin.
On the way to the station, I dropped to Igor Recoon on the Peace Avenue. 
His mother:
‘How nice to meet you! Sit down, have a snack before the journey.’

As if I could sit!
It was dragging me back and forth – from the living room to the balcony, from the balcony to the living room.
I asked Igor to find some paper and write down the things I would say.
Something like:

‘The low sky beheaded the world...’

and then:

‘... shaggy clouds rub against the brain through the all mushy helmet of the skull ...’

Some surreal bullshit, in short, or else I’d got dragged into its quicksands and drowned.
In general, it's only on the train that I came back, between the Plisky and Kruty stations. 
And those psychedelic scraps Zhomnir later placed in the faculty wall newspaper next to ‘Translator’ he liked them so too much.
But all this not about that but about the lecture turned out by Scnar.

That time Rabentus gave me for a pair of joints and, knowing what kind of thermonuclear dope it was, I did not abuse it anymore but showed moderation. 
And in such a state—from moderate to quiet—I floated to the lecture because all the way to the hostel seemed too long and winding at the moment.

And we then sat down, and Scnar was reading from behind the lectern.
I admired what a classy thing!
The plywood all so yellow and well polished and gleaming pleasantly because of that.
And then I suddenly couldn’t get it – something was out of place and very obviously too.
Scnar switched to Latin!
I concentrated but – yes! – exactly Latin... 
And he was jetting it out even more fluenter, in a way, than Lupus the Latinist only that he sounded somehow hollow and his eyes were directed upward, like, to you I call de Profundis! 
I cocked up – was that Scnar, or not Scnar?

And I started to look more closely but above the lecturn of all the Scnar there now remained just a bust. 
I mean it, on the yellow box there stood the bust of Scnar even without arms – just only shoulders.
But the head continued to speak.
And on his upper lip there developed a dimple and it began to go deeper, darken and turn into the toothbrush mustache of Adolf Hitler.
Well, go and fuck yourself!
In a Soviet institute, Hitler's bust reads a lecture and that in Latin! 

Good fellow Scnar!
Not every lecturer would have the nerve to pull such a trick.
Without him, I would still think that if there's a lecture it's necessarily a bullshit. 
Stereotypes, they are very diehard crap.

And with Zhomnir I studied at his home.
On finishing another of translations I brought it to his place and he was shredding it in a dragon-like style at the table in his living room – here’s not the thing, there’s not the thing.
Yes, I felt it before his picking the holes out that those were bosh places, but why? And what another way could it be said?
‘That’s your problem. Find it.’
‘And what if to put it, say, so and so?’
‘No! Don't get over the measure!' 

It was impossible to please him, he would always find what to find fault with.
And because of that, the work with Zhomnir was a good school not to give up.

To relax from the clutches of the Ukrainian language, aka ‘mova’, I asked Zhora Ilchenko for one of the books he brought from India and started translating it into Russian.

Not a too thick book, some two hundred pages, authored by Peter Benchley, a writer in the third generation, that is both the grandpa and daddy were engaged in the same craft.
It was titled ‘The Jaws’, about a shark-cannibal.

A professionally mixed vinaigrette on the whole – a little scrap of everything: bitten-off limbs, a love triangle, the mafia looming in the background. 
True, the final scene of the shark's death unscrupulously copied from 'Moby Dick', but who now reads Melville? 

I finished off a pack of thick copybooks rendering all that in Russian.
The translation was completed in Konotop in winter. 
So, it was the night from Saturday to Sunday or maybe on the winter holidays.

The clock on the kitchen wall was showing some of the small hours.
Putting the final period I draw it as big as half a page – I wanted to finish off the ink in the ball-pen but it never ended.
I turned off the light and lay on the sofa in the living room.
Behind the two windows stood a whitish night dimly fluoresced with the snow.
And it seemed that it, the night, was leaning heavily against the window panes, just about to break in.
I tried to get asleep as soon as I could for I never liked horror movies. 

My sister Natasha read those notebooks and then lend someone else to read and they dissolved, without a trace, in nowhere...

Well, all that’s fine; but when about the main?

Eera.

My relationship with her at that time can be defined with one word – 'torment'.
If trying real hard you can enhance the definition with one more word – 'martyr's torment'.

To begin with, it was not an easy task to resume relations with her in Nezhin.
Why to resume? 
 But I was in love, damn it!
In love at first sight on that path through the wet stalks of corn.

And mind you that, by nature, I am a single-love man.
To fall in love, then to fall out of love, then in again, then out… – that’s not for me.

Not without reason my father often applied to me the winged expression that my Laziness-Mommy was born a moment before me.

Besides, Nezhin confirmed the rightness of my love – with all the multifacedness, multinosedness, multileggedness, multibreastedness of choice – she was the second to none.

Starting from the clothes:
in the era of shortages, she managed to look in a European way, as in the movies of Italo-Franco-German production.
Turning to the linen:
I have never seen such delicately feminine lingerie in my life.
Passing to the most important – to the body.
Such bodies as hers I had seen only in the bathroom at the Object, sitting next to the flames of fire burning in Titan when I was staring at the statues of the Goddesses, the Dryads, and the Nymphs of Hellas in the black and white illustrations in the book of Myths and Legends of Ancient Greece.

But her gait was quite modern – a German-style sweepingly wide step, a decisive move of hands.

She had a round face with high cheekbones and a nose with a tiny hump; wide, but not turned out lips.
The light brown hair of the ideal length, in my favorite hairstyle.

I liked to watch her approaching in her resolute step along the street coming up to the Old Building and to follow how in the distant circle of her face the fuzzy, as in the full moon, lines began to emerge into Eera.

But all that came about not immediately.

At first, she believed the Olya's sinister predictions. 
And even Vera, who had so sympathetically been preparing the bed in Bolshevik for two of us to wade in rolling streams of the voluptuous carnal pleasures, answered with a hesitant shrug of her shoulders – such heinous things are told about him! 
So our first meetings in Nezhin were far from encouraging and I even started to suspect that all between us in Bolshevik was nothing more but a ‘collective farm affair’ of a teacher's daughter using me.
And I pissed off.

After some time a group-mate of Eera, Anna, came to my hostel with the errand from Eera waiting for me in the room of their Department hostel in the main square.
I followed the messenger swearing myself on the way for the shameful lack the male pride... 

Eera was lying on one of the beds, for some reason without a sweatshirt, but in a beautiful, as always, women’s underwear.
The room inhabitants tactfully left us alone.
I sat down on the bed next to her, trying not to show how captivated I was by the beauty of her torso and the strangely pale face.
She said that she had had a pregnancy and a young surgeon-gynecologist made her an abortion at his home under anesthesia.
Is abortion done under anesthesia? At home? Young? 

(...certain thoughts are better never be thought at all…)

Feelings of guilt and compassion added to my love.
I couldn’t help it, I put my arms around her shoulders and, lifting her from the pillow, pressed to my chest.
‘I love you, Eera. You always know that I love you.’

(...and again I run into my being born at a not right time. 
I behave like an ancient Greek from the times when the birth control was a responsibility of women. 
And in the modern enlightened age the weaker sex has already saddled us and mounted while still pretending to be weak…)

In addition to the initial misunderstandings (thanks to the kind care of her girlfriends), we couldn't enjoy normal sexual relations in the first stage of love. 
Not because of no favorable conditions for having sex, on the contrary.
When Eera visited Room 72 my first-year cohabitants, on their own accord, went to the first floor of the hostel to click the TV channels or sit over a bottle of lemonade in the refreshment room.
The problem had deeper roots…

Not at once, but I noticed that after our having sex Eera got in a plaintive mood and on the way from Hosty to her home she spoke of sad things.

How sad it is, when the wind's dragging the autumn leaves across the stadium where you've come to say goodbye to track athletics because of a ligament injury after two years of training...

How sad it is, when at a festive table your parents are got so absorbed in an agitated discussion of their relationships that they do not notice you taking already the third plate from the table and slowly letting it fall to the floor with the scattered fragments of the first two – snap! – before mom and daddy wake up and finally turn to you...

The further, the sadder.
The mood changes got substituted by an undisguised sabotage!
How else to call it if at the end of having sex your partner wriggles out from under you?
It took me a hell of the effort to elicit the reason for that incomprehensible behavior.

Because she felt something like an urge for uncontrollable urination.

(...long live to our Soviet education system – the best system in the world!
It couldn’t cripple the village schoolkids to such a degree, though.
They were saved by direct observation of the natural facts of life.
A village girl would figure out at a glance what, actually, she had being mounted with.
But the poor city dwellers?

Among the color illustrations at the end of Anatomy textbook for the 8th grade, there was an image of dick modestly hidden among intestines out-poured from the belly on the general scheme of internal organs. 
Those appended pictures children studied on their own because during the academic year the class managed to reach only half of the textbook.
How could a poor teacher's daughter know the difference between orgasm and urination?..)

I cannot state that the problem had been solved because of my persistent requests to trust her own body which was wiser than her.
In any case, she gave up wriggling out...
