
All those painful crises in the relationship called for general relaxation and restoration of the dented self-esteem. 
These factors led to the emergence of Sveta, who lived in the same hostel with me, and Maria, who did not live in the hostel but came on occasional visits, and more oftener I went to spend the night at her place... 

Despite the fact, that Sveta studied at the Biological Department, she lived on the fifth floor in the hostel. 
During one of her visits from the fifth floor to the third, she got conquered by my restraint.

I had just returned from seeing Eera to the vestibule of her house when they told me there was chicken soup on the table in Room 77.

One of the advantages of a student canteen is that after visiting it you still can find enough room in your system for a chicken soup at any time of day. 

I entered the room and turned on the light.
On one of the beds there lay a girl who did not make a secret of the fact that she had nothing on apart from a bed sheet.
There was a pot on the table and a couple of spoons.
Taking the lid off the pot uncovered the presence of the soup, about two servings.
I wiped off one spoon, sat on a vacant bed and started eating. 
The soup was cold, but unmistakably of chicken.

The girl wrapped in the bed sheet protested that the light was preventing her from falling asleep. 
Turning the light off, I threw the door open, because eating soup in the dark is uncomfortable, and finished it off in the dim illumination from the corridor lamp. 
Some delicious soup, I liked it notwithstanding it’s being cold.
Then I left.

‘The less we love a woman,
The more we’re liked by her...’

So the wounds inflicted by the tormenting love  I began to heal with medicinal visits to the fifth floor in the hostel.
Sveta was simply created for that.
Not tall, with a boyish haircut, she had a slender body and generous breasts.
She was good at anything but her special dish was the blowjob. 
And she literally lost her head from touches to her nipples.
A happy gift of nature for both her and you...

In addition to psychological issues resulting from the Soviet school system, I sometimes ran into irreconcilable ideological clashes with Eera.

Once the institute authorities ordered a volunteer clean-up in the Count’s Park.
The girls of my course were raking the fallen leaves in great heaps and Igor Recoon and I set them on fire. 

After translating ‘The Jaws' I knew that burning leaves in the open was a crime against the planet's atmosphere; there was a short passage to it in the book. 
But could you prove anything to anyone?
‘Sehrguey, don't put airs on! Everyone does it. We're not in America.' 
When in Rome do as Romans do.
The Count’s Park got drowned in white smoke and we dispersed.

Bypassing the Old Building I saw a girl in sportswear and liked her from afar.
I didn’t even know why she attracted me so.
A wide white kerchief around the neck, with big black spots, that's for one. 
But not only because of that.
And not for the sneakers.
I came closer – what the f-f.. damn! – but that’s Eera herself!
And feeling so deeply moved by the pleasant surprise I immediately told her how I had just fallen in love with her once again.
‘You had not known it was me but fell in love?’
‘Yes! Can you imagine?’
‘How could you!’
‘But with you!’
‘You had not known it was me!’
‘But think a bit! Since it turned out you, then I have no chance to fall in love with anyone else. It’s only you that I can love.’
‘If you a minute ago fell in love, you’ll do it again!’
‘Who with? Isn’t it clear it’s only you who turns me on?’
‘You still can't get it!’
‘Okay. So I shouldn’t have fallen in love with you?’
‘No!’
‘Never?’
‘No, never!’
A vicious circle – love me yet never fall in love with me.
But she was really cool in her sports, and moved so classy…

(...with all my mug's game to show off as a crossbred of Casanova and a refined aristocrat of the spirit, I, actually, am a classic example of a dull patsy. 
Why?
Too gullible and too ready to fall for a new bauble... )

It was enough for Ilya Lipes to drop an unfamiliar word ‘she-oxen’ and I followed him like a puppy on the lead.
‘Come on! Let’s visit she-oxen!’
The casually used term triggered an imagination flight picturing a flock of free of complexes hetaeras but in reality, they were the same girls as in the hostel. 
One she-ox was throwing her birthday party.

And now in that half dark room in an old private house, we were, like, having fun, like, dancing all-out fast dance. 
Then I would lay with some of them on one of the beds in the next room and she would eagerly get topless and then block any further movements, like any other oxen-vixen: 
‘Do not torture yourself nor me!’
And I got blues and went out in the corridor to rang Eera and once again announce my love. 
A sentimental patsy.

And she immediately got it:
‘What music is there? Where are you?’

Usually, I called her from the booth in Hosty's lobby. 
That was almost soundproof, the vestibule by the locked entrance door partitioned with glass from the vestibule of the open one. 
We would talk for hours if not for her people at home needed the telephone, or some student started to knock at the glass door from the lobby. 
Talks about absolutely nothing.
I just loved to hear her voice.
She would say a word there and I got carried beyond myself here...

‘Just at one place, I'll explain later. Not a phone talk. I love you. Bye.' 

(...everyone knew then, that the phones were tapped so the phrase ‘not a phone talk’ excluded further questions…)

And later I had to drive a fool to the tune as if a buddy drag dealer had come to Nezhin for a visit and asked to accompany him to a safe house of his where the music was played on the account of the high guest arrival but I did not stay there and left after calling her. 
Some stuff that would hardly fit even in an elephant’s ears.
To believe such an ear-bending bullshit one has to really want to believe. 
Although, she might have believed after those icons.

Ah, yes, the icons…

They told me that Veerich wanted to see me and I went to his place.
At the winter holidays, he was skiing in the Carpathians and broke one of his legs and both skis. 
So he kept to bed, plastered.
He and his student wife rented a flat in the city.
When she went out to the kitchen, Veerich started his monologue about too long and dirty hand of Zionism stretched out to our cultural heritage and spiritual assets.

That all was to the fact that Ilya Lipes had three or four Orthodox icons in his briefcase under his bed in the hostel.
Somewhere they had bombed a village church and now Lipes wanted to push the catch off like antique rarities.
Who could bear such arrogance? 
If not for the plaster Veerich himself would not allow trampling our holy shrines… 
In short, could I bomb the icons back and restore the historical justice?

(...as for the differences between the religious confessions Veerich was cracking a nut with a sled-hummer. 
I could still believe in Zeus or, say, Poseidon, but all the modern gods in the vogue do not stir any sympathy in me though (which is characteristic) I don't believe in atheism either. 
But the request to bomb was properly addressed.
No problems.
I’m doing what I'm told and think after…)

In the morning I waited for the students to leave the hostel for their respective classes.
One kick in a door in the silent corridor and the lock jumped out.
Everything as described – the briefcase under the bed, the icons in the briefcase.
They have a good nose for such things those Serbs, even in the third generation.

I left the briefcase where it was and took the icons to the washroom.
They looked like the one Grandma Katya had in her hutta only on bigger boards.
My black ‘diplomat’ case was already waiting for me in under the sink in the partitioned compartment of the washroom.
The icons fitted in perfectly. 

And then I felt the truth of the proverb about chickens stealing. 
‘Your hands are really trembling! Been stealing chickens, eh?' 
My fingers were shaking with uncontrollable tremor.
But not the way they shook after the capsizing in the UAZ truck.
That tremor had been like somewhat shallow while in the washroom, my fingers were just knocking against each other. 
That’s what sacrilege brings about.

I didn’t care for the finger-prints.
Ilya would not go to the criminal investigation:
‘Please, check for the traces on my briefcase where I kept the icons from a robbed temple.’
However, taking the catch directly to Veerich was not correct.
So, I asked Eera to keep my case at home for a couple of days, she was on a sick leave then.

Then, like an exemplary student, I attended the classes and, already after the canteen, climbed up to the third floor in Hosty.
There I witnessed a noisy commotion in the corridor.
The room of Lipes had been broken in!
I approached and saw that the door was indeed kicked open.
Dirty bastards!
And what’s missing?
Ilya kept silent to my question and bitterly tut-tuting from the frustration...

And then I decided to finally break up with Eera.
Was not that enough for heartbreaking harrowing?
Moreover, because she absolutely didn't trust me.

I received a letter:
‘Sehrguey,
I have been fascinated by you for so long, but I did not dare to say it.
Today I'll be waiting for you at 19.00 near the Old Building. 
Lyuba’
That evening I escorted Eera to the vestibule of the staircase entrance in her apartment-block and there she flamed in a passionate fire:
“Do not go, please, just stay a little longer!’
I looked at the watch it was ten to seven.
‘Well, the guys are waiting at Hosty. We agreed to draw a pool in Pref.’
‘They can wait. Don’t go!’
I hardly managed to leave.

When I neared the Old Building it was exactly seven.
I had checked the time under a street lamp on the way.
And on the square in front of the Old Building, there was nobody. 
But I did not stop there smoking, waiting. 
No.
I diagonally crossed the empty square.
Only a bit slowly.
I had all the right to admire the nature of the winter evening, after all, had I? 

That pine tree looks like a cedar.
Could it really be a cedar?
In those dense branches, there lives an owl, in amidst their thicket, it's twilight there even in the afternoon for him. 
And on the snowdrift under the pine-cedar the offals of his feasts with small rodents.
One of the sanitary care-takers of nature. 

And by the way, I hadn't lied. 
The moment I entered Room 72 Slavic and Twoic followed me: 
‘Well, will we draw a pool, or will we?’

Soon I found out that the letter was written by Eera's girlfriend.
Eera was dictating for the girl to write.
Her name was not ‘Lyuba’, though...

All are attracted by the novelty, but the dull patsies are get also caught.

Well, and besides, there appeared Maria.

A brunette of the age so praised by Balzac.
When she smiled at me on the sidewalk I did not immediately get it why. 
It turned out she had had dropped for a couple of minutes to that she-ox’s birthday only I did not notice when.
In general, she explained in what apartment-block she lived and said the apartment number.
42.

Though I had a busy day with a concert in the assembly hall of the Old Building, I found time and money for a bottle of vodka.
I carried it with the Alimosha trick – in the sleeve. 
It made for such a hard bicep.
So I came to the address, the fourth floor, the door to the left.
She opened it.
We had a little snack and landed on the sofa.

I do not like to cum when I had just started, but it happens.
"I'm sorry,' I said, ‘ I'm in a hurry. There's a concert at five.' 
Which concert? Where?.

She sat in the second row when I from the stage, and already with the bass guitar, and already as the leading vocalist, was screaming: 

‘Do you remember those two sta-a-rs?!
That disappeared from the sky?!..’

A third-year student, Vitya Kononevich, played the rhythm guitar and sang along backing with a third; and on the drums some, well, Lyosha, it seems, also from that course, a local guy.

After the concert, Maria and I had a walk. 
She led to a friend of hers.
The woman brought a mug of medical alcohol out to the staircase landing and a piece of fish for a snack.
It was 96% spirits because the tongue stuck to the palate.
But since then our go-rounds with Maria were not inferior in duration to the acts in the plays of Shakespeare.

She had a son sixth-grader, who I never met, and the one-room apartment. 
Apart from the sofa, there was a double bed and a radio receiver on the nightstand next to it. 
All the night long it was playing softly to itself in the middle waves ranges glowing with its small yellow eyelet. 

And her cummings really superb:.
‘More! More! A! I wanna.. Mo-o-ore! A!.’
Maybe it had been her worked out coda, but still a cool one.

And she couldn’t tolerate the smell of the seed, so immediately asked to go to the bathroom.
I went at once, she was worth it.
For my obedience, she did me a massage that was her profession. 
I couldn’t get it why they were so crazy about it. Oh, massage!
But I did not contradict here either.

Sometimes, even very late, the doorbell rang.
She rose from the bed, threw on her long gown and went out to the landing to have a word with the untimely visitor.
I was not quibbling, I understood that a nurse, even a masseuse, had somehow to survive in this world.

She had a beautiful body, as in black and white pics of Soviet amateur pornography, and she herself, too, in that Transcarpathian style.
But she did not take off her nightgown in bed, or very rarely, she said there was a breast problem, mastitis, or something.
And after so many runs into ‘eager-top-unsurrenderable-downs' that change was even refreshing. 
More so because she knew how to use her lower parts.
‘And may I do so?’
And would start such a ‘so’ that I never imagined possible, and did not even imagine at all.
Yes, you may and welcome too!
When dropping to Room 72, she skillfully used its plain furniture set there.

In between having sex we had friendly and benevolent relations.
She shared her plans for buying me a pair of slippers and promised to cure when I catch a venereal disease.
She told me…

However, it doesn't matter, otherwise, I will never finish. 
Like after a mug of medical alcohol.
In a word, I wanna say, Balzac was not a fool, even being a Frenchman...

On May 1st, being one of the only four boys on the course, then, whether you want it or not, you had to carry a portrait of a member of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the CPSU. 
After passing over the main square in the institute’s columns that member still had to be taken to the Old Building and handed over to the House Manager.

When I had already left the Manager’s storeroom, Slavic warned me that he saw Eera in front of the Old Building and she asked him where I was.
Slavic knew that I had broken up with her for over a month, that's why he warned.

That separation was not easy for me.
The evenings stretched endlessly long without her voice over the telephone.
And I was missing her German step from afar.
Occasionally seeing her in the institute corridors I got convinced over and over again that there was no one more beautiful than her and my heart tightened bitterly.
But still and yet I had to be firm and put the final period, after all...

So to avoid an unbearably tormenting encounter I decided to sit in the Old Building until she left.
Moreover, on a country outing the day before with Maria, we agreed to spend May Day at her place. 

For the outing, we went to the station and in the bright rays of the sunset walked along the path by the tracks to the forest on the outskirts. 
We met a pair of workmen on the way.
One of them started to yelp something but I paid no attention – anyone would envy when you go to the wood with so a juicy beauty and the nightingales around tear themselves apart in so vigorous trills that those stand up like a dense wall of sound. 

We found a clearing among the trees and in the gathering darkness, I built a fire. 
It was very warm, she even took off her cloak. 
We did not have glasses for the wine.
‘More! A! More!..’
The bonfire was already burnt out and in the iridescent glow of its coals, an indistinct shadow rushed across the clearing. 
A dog.
How scared she got!
There is nothing more appealing than women’s fears.
And you, like, an epic knight protectively embrace her shoulders. 
I even wanted it again.
‘More! Mo-ore!.’

We were returning already in the middle of the night and had for a long time waited at the bus stop. 
It turned to be the last bus carrying workers of the defense plant Progress after the second shift.
Or rather, female workers, there were only women on the bus.
They gave Maria so unfriendly looks.
Like, we were slaving like the cursed and that bitch horsing around with her fucker.
In the spring even females become fiercely brutal...

That is to say that I did not need that meeting with Eera.
I waited for another twenty minutes before I left the Old Building. 
‘Sehryozha!’
She still waited between the massive columns on the high porch.

Well, what could I do if she was so beautiful?
If I had to tame my breath and heart?
We went around the corner with the plaque ‘Here N. V. Gogol studied...' and stopped to talk under the wall with high ancient windows. 
I was astonished at her pallor.
Not grayish sick, but as of thin china.
White, on the brink of transparency, porcelain.
I did not know what was tearing my heart more, her beauty, or my pity for her.
What a stupid brute I had been! 
I had tortured both her and myself so long so much!
I again was embracing her.
She laughed and cried on my chest.
How I loved her!

That cursed month she was coming home and just lay down prostrate.
The pain was literally physical and nothing mattered at all.
Mommy did not know what to do,
‘What’s wrong with you, Eera?’
‘Nothing.’

The beast! Bastard!
How pale she was!
And so beautiful.
‘Come on to Hosty. The room is vacant.’
She happily went home to change and tell her mother that she was celebrating and spending the night at a girlfriend’s.

(...in the Soviet holidays most of all I liked the calm following the demonstrations.
The streets got empty, almost no traffic nor pedestrians.
People went home, starting to celebrate...)
