
The hostel was also empty.
Except for the Room 72 on the third floor.
That was our room, our hostel, our holiday. 
The Feast of Reconciliation.

Sveta nearly spoiled the holiday. 
Taking advantage of the solitude and quietness in the corridor of locked doors I ventured to the toilet in only my underpants and on the way back I entered the washroom.
It was there that she screwed me over.
‘What’s that!’
And she began to talk my ear off that she'd never put up with an expansion of the staff without a preliminary coordination. 
She was forgiving me Eera, forgiving Maria, but who that new whore in my room was?
‘Are you crazy? That’s Eera!’

Well, she had just peeped in and there was someone standing by the window.
Where could Eera possibly have such a cute negligee from?
As if I knew. I saw it for the first time also.

On the second day, I left Hosty in the morning. 
In the grocery store on the main square, they were selling a rare deficit: white and blue cans of condensed milk. 
Proud with the hunted prey, I returned to Room 72 and Eera said from the bed by the window: 
‘So? You brought condensed milk?’
I was f-f.. well, I mean, flabbergasted.
‘You… what.. that is, how?’
‘You’ve got such a pleased nose, it was seen at once.’

And possessing such skills to write counterfeit letters?
There was something, not that… 

So I surrendered and we started to live on as one common united family.
They call it polygamy in books.
I was sort of the uniting link in it.

(...the link should master and keep to one golden rule – no names.
‘Darling' is the very thing, it sounds pleasant and causes no misunderstandings. 
Perhaps, someone would prefer ‘pussy’ or ‘bunny’, it’s a matter of taste, but, in my humble opinion, why to start up an extra zoo?
‘Yes, darling...’
‘Come on, darling...’…)

Sveta did not kick up excess dust anymore.
She clearly knew her exact place – after Eera, before Maria.

Officially, the girls were not introduced but knew about the existence of the others. 
Eera and Sveta for sure, Maria, most likely – yes.
In communication with the darlings, I was not particularly keen on that topic – who knows what about who, but Nezhin was a provincial town where everyone knew everything about everybody else.

When in the third year I was having a pedagogical practice at School 2, one of the teachers there started giving out some disparaging information about Maria.
She took special care not to look at me, but at my course-mate who also practiced there.

That my course-mate was a very studious student.
And she took so great pains preparing for her first practice lesson.
At home, she collected all her dolls and puppets and arranged them sitting in a row upon the piano lid and started getting prepared:
‘Good morning, children!..’

(...infantilism is a deadly weapon, for me it’s more terrible than a machine gun.
I mean, it makes me wanna puke…)

Nothing like the newlywed couple on our floor in Hosty.
After their marriage, they got a whole room for themselves. 
The students living there had moved to other rooms, but the furniture remained.
At times, to relax after intense mental work in their educational process, they arranged ‘races’ on Saturdays.
A couple of other students from the floor were invited for an overnight stay and after the dinner, they started the ‘race' heats with the change of partners. 
I do not know the details, though, I did not participate in those races.
Vitya Kononevich was a leading jockey there...

(...honestly, if you ask me, having sex is something just for two.
It is of so intimate a nature that even a condom doesn't fit in two's company. 
I understand that I’m fairly old-fashioned but there's nothing doing about it, that is my innate quality...)

In the summer my pioneer practice was held at the camp ‘The Young Construction Worker' near the town of Sednev. 
At the times of Chernigov princedom there stood a mighty fortress for defense from Tatars, Lithuanians, or Novgorodians – whoever would come to plunder.
And now of all the fortress there remained just one tower.
From the tower, a steep winding descent led down to the bridge connecting the sandy banks of the Snov river. 
After the bridge in the small pine forest were two pioneer camps, side by side: ‘The Young Construction Worker’ and ‘The Young Chemist’, followed by the boundless wheat fields.

My trainee position at the camp was that of a substitute caretaker.
That meant that when the caretaker of some platoon went to Chernigov I was to oversee the on-duties kids from her platoon laying tables in the canteen for breakfast, midday meal, tea, and supper and if on that day the camp was taken out to the river I had to watch that the platoon’s pioneers did not splash outside the iron grid but only in the fenced part of the river.

Going to Chernigov was not so easy because of transportation problems and caretakers rarely went there.
So all my job was to switch on the music from the radio-unit to broadcast from the camp loudspeakers and also announce at the microphone the start of the ‘dead’ hour and ‘lights-out’.
I don't know why I was doing it with feline intonations of a gay. 
‘Attayntion! Leets-ouwt for thee camp!’

The radio-unit was in the senior pioneer leader’s room partitioned from a small gymnasium stripped of any equipment except for one bed on which I slept.
The door in the far wall of the gym opened onto the stage of a small auditorium in the open air surrounded by pine trees.
I was kicking back, and reading what would turn up in the camp library, and growing my beard because after the camp I was going to work with the student construction platoon of the NGPI. 
In a word, I was indulging in a life of an unshaven renegade.

In the position of the senior pioneer leader was my course-mate Irina from Bakhmach.
I somehow did not immediately realized that she was courting me until her invitation to the ancient tower of Sednev with the small built-in romantic restaurant.
Through the loopholes in the thick (no less than a meter and a half) walls on the plain far below were seen the shadows from summer clouds flowing in gallop like a raiding horde of robbers.
She treated me with a blackberry liqueur which I did not like, some cloying swill.

In the two years of studying she obviously re-evaluated her standpoints and priorities, compared to the night that we spend together when being the first year students. 
However, I couldn’t in earnest consider her for practical purposes.
Not because of being a vengeful dickhead ‘aha! you didn’t give it then so go without now!’
No, it’s not like me.
The reason was my dutiful commitment to what I’m told.
They say ‘no’ to me and I obediently retreat, but in order that later I get at it again they have to explicitly tell me ‘come on here’.
She pinned her hopes on the liqueur alone to do the trick.

And I also couldn’t concentrate on the other trainee, one more Irina, but already from Nezhin, the daughter of pro-rector Budowski.
Firstly, I disliked both his bald head and his general moral character, and secondly, she was an unmistakable virgin. 

So the champion laurels in the contest, quite predictably and inevitably, went to the blonde sports trainer, again Irina, from the neighboring ‘The Young Chemist' camp. 
At first, we were dating on the river bank in the company of her receiver ‘spidola' but it was warmer in my gym. 

Once I entertained a group of visitors comprising Slavic, Twoic, and Petyunya for playing Preferans and Sveta for everything else.
After the game, the boys started racing around the gym after the hedgehog brought to me by pioneers that day. 
I asked them not to torment the animal and they switched over to voyeuristic eavesdropping to the erotic arias from the radio-unit room where Irina from Bakhmach had a guest who visited her on the same day, also from Bakhmach.

Then I gave the boys a pair or two of camp cloth blankets for them not to sleep on the bare floorboards and turned off the light. 

Sveta, who had the legitimate right to a part of my bed, performed from that elevation before the three, frozen in awe and admiration, music lovers on the floor a concert for a flute without an orchestra.

Another time I went to Nezhin, on a sort of day off, but thee I behaved like a pig. 
I swallowed too many pills and dining in the canteen room at the station had almost fallen asleep in a plate of borshch.
Eera got outraged and left.
Slavic, who was also going to Chernigov had to drag me, like a vegetable, into the diesel train.
Because the branch line to Chernigov was not electrified.

I slept off on the diesel train but I still remained bored because everything was so dull.
I felt like that for the most time of that practice.
Dull and unnecessary was that I lied to a mujik in the field who asked which camp I was from.
Why did I say I was from ‘The Chemist’?

And it was dull when a pack of youngsters from Chernigov came to the pine forest by someone’s daddy’s Volga.
They kicked up thief-swagger and one of them pulled a big handsome dagger I looked around for a stick, although it was obvious that he would be happy be relieved of the weapon. 
A second of delay, the moment was lost and the trophy went to the chauffeur of the camp. 
Well done, mujik!

And because of being bored and off-hand when diving from the high bank I, like, dislocated something in my back and a couple of days was turning to the sides with my whole body. 

And also dull was taking a swim at night even after some car drove on the bank flashing the headlights at the girls who had already changed their mind to enter the river and I had to get out of the water in altogether just as I had come to this world, armed only with a distorted expression of the unshaven face. 
I do not know what aboriginal mask my face looked like at that moment but they switched off their headlights.

Later Irina from Bakhmach was making sport of my dick size not living up to her expectations. 
It did not hurt my feelings because of everything was so boring…

‘A vain present, a chance present,
Why are you given to me, Life?...’

Yet, when on the Poseidon Day the pioneers of both camps caught me, dragged and threw into a pond by the river it was not boring, it was right.
At first, I felt offended and wet, but then like laughing. 
Well done, kids!
Served the bastard well! 

The night before the departure Irina the trainer and I once again sat on the river bank.
There were so many stars that you could hardly see the sky behind them and I had blues that everything was somehow going away and getting lost.
She for some reason did not want to have sex and we just sat leaning our backs against each other. 
The stars were shining both from beneath—reflected in the silent flow of the Snov—and from above too.
They were everywhere and will be and yet it’s impossible to keep them.
Everything flows away.
Probably, I had blues because of the ‘spidola’ that suddenly began a sermon in English.

I did not understand at all what all that was about because it was not the English Department’s language laboratory texts about the family of Parkers but you could guess that it was a sermon.
I escorted Irina to ‘The Young Chemist’.
She went in and locked the gate, but I called her again.
We climbed the grating of the gate from both sides and had the final kiss, a camp kiss on top of the grating.
Forgive me and goodbye, my loss...

I knew the city of Pryluky for a long time, yet in absentia.
On the back of the Prima cigarette packs, there was printed the city's name. 
‘cigarette f-ka m. Pryluky.’
The city of Pryluky was rebuilt by the Germans during its occupation so the streets in it were strictly parallel and methodically perpendicular to each other.
Except for the outskirts where the bus station was later built.

The Commander of the student construction platoon was Vladimir Maiba, from the Physics and Mathematics Department.
The platoon’s Commissar was Igor, a Ukrainian nationalist.
He suspected Maiba to be a secret collaborator of KGB and therefore was constantly mocking him and discrediting his authority in every possible way. 
And I was a leading specialist, sort of, because in my military ID I was announced as a ‘bricklayer’.

There were two girls and fifteen guys in the platoon plus the above mentioned commanding staff.
We stayed in a hostel of ‘chemists’ but only for one night and in the morning were to go to Auto-Depot 4 which was on the highway stretch between the Ivkovtsy village and the town of Ladan.

‘Chemists’ were prisoners who for their supposedly good behavior were paroled from the zone to finish their term off ‘on a chemistry’.
Any plant or a factory with production lines hazardous to health, a mine, a construction site would do to serve ‘a chemistry' for paroled prisoners. 

The control over the ‘chemists’ was pretty tough.
They should be present in the hostel no later than a specified hour, not be drunk, not bring whores and many other ‘nots’.
Yet they were not guarded and overseen by the turnkeys and did not sleep in the common dormitory.
And they even got some payment to be shared with the curator militiaman on whom it depended they do not lose the parole and get back to the zone.

After the shower, I and Igor, who although being a Ukranian nationalist spoke a very good Russian and dreamed of moving to St. Petersburg, the cultural capital, went out to check the geometrical correctness of Pryluky. 
‘Katranikha! I am damned! Is that you?' 
‘Don’t shout! Some of my pupils can be around. I’m a teacher here.’
Well, of course, sorry, how could I forget myself.
For one year already she was disseminating there the seeds of the wisdom, of kindness and values eternal...

Auto-Depot 4 was all by itself, neither in a village nor in a town, just behind the forest belt bordering the highway. 
First, there was an old two-story building.
On the first floor it had some locked warehouses and on the second floor, there was a spacious hall with beds for students of the construction platoon and a small room for its two girls. 
Then there followed a one-story stoker-house and after it the vast grounds of Auto-Depot 4 behind a high red brick wall.
There were garages, a canteen, and many other buildings, some of which hadn’t yet been completed, and in the middle of the grounds a wide and deep foundation pit.

Steel wires were stretched over the pit, along and across.
Under the intersections of the stretched wires, our platoon had to collect the plank formworks and fill them with concrete to make the ‘glasses' for insertion of support columns. 
But all that in the future and for the beginning there were shovels and – ‘take as much as you can, throw as far as you’re able’.
Everything was so nostalgic familiar.
And only the uniform was different.

After a working day, the stoker-’chemists’, Yura and Tomato opened the cock inside their stoker-house and from the pipe outside (high up in the wall) gushed a broad jet of water.
You could stand under the jet and get a shower.
The water was chilly, of course, but it was a summer season...

A week later the platoon Commander called a general meeting.
The agenda of one issue – feeding of the platoon’s contingent, because the food in the canteen was just a…

(...well, I don’t know, the same havvage as anywhere else…)

The meeting approved – to feed on our own resources which to be obtained for money taken by the Commander from the Auto-Depot foreman in advance on account of our future labor victories. 
From now on the girls were not only paramedics but also cooks. 
Each evening, as it got dark, in twos or threes we went on a raid on the potato field of the nearby collective farm.
Well, sweeping anything looking ripe on the way too.

‘A furious construction platoon
Is like to a fire in the steppe!..’

The students were complimenting the cooking of the girls. 
I don’t know; well, on the whole – yes, hotter than in the canteen, but otherwise a havvage as anywhere else.

A couple of times we went to dances in the village of Ivkovtsy by the truck water-tanker of a young driver. 
The girls in the cab, the rest where they could grab a hold of the iron cistern of the truck.
We danced to the hits of Leshchenko: 

‘From the fields, the sad mood goes away, 
The anxiety goes from the soul,
And the vistas wide unfold ahead...’

After the dances with a whizz through the breeze, hugging the steely cistern…

Once we went for the midday break and meal in Ladan.
In English ‘ladan’ means ‘incense’ with all connotations to it.
But I also had a meaningful image – a curly beard, the hair grown below the ears, and a twisted bandage tied around the head to keep the hair from falling over the eyes.
You wouldn't make it out at a glance whether it's an excommunicated priest or Rambo from black and white photos. 

But when in the local noshery Rambo demanded a bottle of white be served in a beer glass everything fell in place – a drunkard from Auto-Depot 4! 

We returned from Ladan to our bedroom where Sasha Chalov, a third-year student from the English Department came from Pryluky where he lived.
And he came not alone but with his friend and a briefcase full of ammunition.
‘The Sun in the Tumbler!’
After all, they learned to produce full of poetry stickers in our country!

Adding the ‘Sun' on top of berry&fruit from Ladan I felt a need to catch my breath. 
I wanted to lie in the bushes of the forest belt, but would such friends allow you to breathe?
Sasha and his chum tore me from our mutual mother earth and dragged to the second floor and dropped on the bed.
Some fucking lot of help it was!
I had to puke from the second floor like that jet from the wall of the stoker-house...

Actually, they came to say they needed a bass guitarist for ‘doing trash' at weddings in the city of Pryluky. 
We served two weddings at weekends but both for free because the happy couples were relatives of Sasha’s chum.
It turned out a job for grub.
So to the second wedding, I took three students from the Physics and Mathematics Department along with me, like, they were sound engineers. 

The handle of ‘Tomato’ suited the stoker-‘chemist’ perfectly because his face had red skin and his hair was of natural orange color.
He was the most joyful ‘chemist’ in the world.
Had I his skills at sharping cards I’d also walk my life smiling.
He shuffled the deck and dealt hands with eight tricks in hearts for himself.
Even fully aware that he was stacking the deck you could not follow how. 

In the excavated foundation pit we worked incompetently but with enthusiasm, until at the end of the month, the foreman presented the work orders for our labor. 
By his calculations, after deduction of the paid advance, our payment per worker equaled to the student monthly scholarship of 45 rubles. 
At that moment Auto-Depot 4 ran out of nails and we had nothing to collect the formworks with.

The enthusiasm dried up and we still had ahead ten days of sitting without the job. 
In that period our food expenses would eat away our earnings. 

The platoon sent a negotiating group for talks with the director of Auto-Depot 4.
The delegation consisted of me and one of two girls, the blonde one. 
She did not understand a fig either in construction works or nails for carpentering but she was blonde which imparts the right impulse to the process of any negotiations.

The chief engineers said that the director was not around, he was harvesting the crops in the fields of the patronized collective farm.
The good news was that a truck with spare parts was leaving soon for the harvesting field camp, which could also take us there. 
If there were no blondes in the delegation he would hardly have thought of mentioning the truck which he himself was driving while the blonde was sitting in the cab between him and me. 

I was surprised at his ability to recognize the Auto-Depot 4 vehicles on the highway long before their number plates were discernible.
The chief engineer explained that he was recognizing them by their horns and asked if I knew Tshombe. 

Of course, I knew Tshombe who machine-gunned Patrice Lumumba when I was still a pioneer.
However, I could not figure out any connection between the trucks rushing in the opposite direction along the sunlit highway and the dictator from I could not remember which African country because I was still a pioneer then.
So I denied any acquaintance and said no, I did not know him.

The chief engineer said that Tshombe was Auto-Depot 4 director to whom we were traveling now.
This Tshombe of a director ordered the radiators of all the vehicles in Auto-Depot 4 to be marked with white paint in the form of a large Roman 'five'. 
The marks were visible from afar and, in the opinion of the drivers, resembled horns. 
The drivers cursed Tshombe’s meanness because such marks added complexity to going on their contingent runs.
However, the director had been Tshombe even before the Depot's vehicles acquired the horns... 

The director was not in the field camp of four big trailers.
They said he was reaping another field.
The chief engineer with the spare parts and the blonde remained by the trailers and I went to Tshombe. 

The brand new water tanker of the UAZ brand was driven by a ten-year boy, the son of the director.

A brown harvester with white inscription ‘Niva’ on its side was encircling a yellow hot field in the cloud of thick dust.
I went to meet it but it rumbled by and I have to run after and jump on the short ladder that led to the inclined cab of the combine.
The harvester roared and pounded on in its ride through the dust 
For the first time in my life I had climbed aboard such a juggernaut but everything went on intuitively – that’s the ladder, that’s the door.
 
In the narrow cabin, a man in a cap sat with his back to me and watched through the glass of the front wall how his combine fell and drew in thick ears of wheat. 
I slammed the door, cutting off the knock in the bunker behind my back and also stared at the rows of crawling ears while I reported to the top of his cap that our platoon was sitting around, the nails had run out and we wouldn’t earn anything.
Under the rumble of the engine, the ears twitched, fell on a wide rotating shaft and flowed upward in shredded bunches. 

The director did not turn around and answered that he would see what could be done and let the chief engineer come to him. 
I got out of the cab into the dust from the bunker, went down the ladder and jumped off on the run. 
I saw neither the face nor the skin color of the man I had been talking to, but I felt that some dictators were worthy of respect...

In the trailer with a long table under the oilcloth, there was the midday meal in progress and we were fed too. 
Such a dinner does not fall under the name of havvage it was a real grub.

The cook in his stained but otherwise white jacket put half a dipper of sore cream in a huge enamel bowl and filled it with red steaming borshch.
A big piece of freshly boiled meat was put on top.
Having eaten all of that, I got filled to the brim.

Then the cook served golden balls of fried young potatoes with dill and meat sauce.
Very tasty, but having absolutely no room for the second course I finished it off simply out of principle.

The compote seemed a glut excess, but, gradually, I poured it in too.
With thanks for the treat, I rose and very carefully went down the steps of the front porch. 
When on the ground I unbuckled my belt and with the gait of dividers proceeded to the garden adjoining the field.

There I neatly laid me down on an armful of dry hay under an apple tree in the hope that maybe I somehow would not burst.
And so it happened!
By the time the blonde came into the garden I felt normal.
