~~~ My Universities. Part Two ~~~ 

That was exactly what I dreamed about, or rather did not allow myself to dream of in all those two years – that in the morning I would wake up not from the nasal roar of the on-duty idiot but from a female embrace, that of Olga.
She came home from work, lay atop of me, hugged through the blanket and I woke up and answered her kiss.

Our talk somehow did not come out well if an exchange of monosyllabic words could be called talk at all. 
And we looked at each other in such a way that my mother, who was on her vacation, took our daughter Lenochka and went to the Bazaar.

Everything in life is really repeating itself. 
What was, that will be again.
The difference is only in details, in the accompanying facts.
For example, that my mother returned from the Bazaar (and not from the store) without oranges, and that nothing restrained me this time.

As for hieroglyphics left on my wrist by the claws of a hotel sadist, Olga, sure thing, took notice of them, attentively studied and read their message, but not out loud. 
Well, I did not insist on her sharing the obtained information. 

(...there is nothing more elastic than time.
The current year lasts without an end or edge; a year lived through turns just a point in time. 
A point has no length – it does not even begin.
Anything shorter than a year is not considered having even a point’s worth.
What can you say about the last month?
That it had several Fridays and one thirteenth.
And about the last hour?
Oh, yes! It was sixty minutes.
Empty juggling with numbers and terms. 
A decade is a no bigger point. 
After that point spent at school, a person begins to grow bristles. 
If the same point has been spent in the zone – the joints ache (especially in the right shoulder) but all the same it’s just a point…)

A week after the demobilization, the two-year eternity of the construction battalion became just scraps of memories pinned to a point in the past. 
The flow of the very same life takes all those points to hell or someplace else and it does not matter where because you have to go on further with the flow of the life-stream. 

When bathing, there are two ways of entering the water.
With the first you go in the water step by step, pulling your shoulders up, rising on tiptoes cautiously as the bottom grew deeper...
The other way is going until it's knee-deep and with a shout (or without it) plunge headlong forward.

It was time to plunge into my civilian life.

Master Borya Sakoon died and did not fulfill his promise to retire.

The Arkhipenkos moved to the Kamchatka Peninsular, that’s the fishermen’s paradise place.

My brother and sister graduated from the Railway Transportation School and were sent to pay for their diplomas by working in the exploration and construction of railways somewhere in the Urals between Ufa and Orenburg.

Vladya and Chuba returned from the army half a year before me and had time enough to get used to the concurrent life-stream. 
Skully had developed a solid bold patch over his head and was looking forward to becoming twenty-seven – the end of the draft liability age.
He was exempted from the army as an only breadwinner for his single mother, God save her until his twenty-seven-year-old! 

My re-appearance at the Konotop polite society did not amuse me much. 
We gathered at the Vlady’s, I stuffed a joint but my friends did but a couple of drags each, out of mere politeness.
From there we made for the Loony where the Spitzes were playing dances in the park. 
When passing the Store 6, Vladya farted at a lighted match that Skully brought to his behind.
The emitted ammonia flared up in a blue bunch of flame.
It did not really delight me.
In the construction battalion, I had seen all sorts of like tricks and I did not want unwelcome recollections. 
In general, my way of getting on high wasn't fine with them, and theirs didn't turn me on. 
We remained friends but in the course of our following lives, we streamed, basically, in different currents...

I borrowed The Adventures of Captain Blood from the Club library but couldn't read even a half of it – rubbish. 
And once it had been my regular thrill.
‘What do you keep in the newspaper on top the wardrobe?' asked Olga. 
‘A spike condom. Wanna try?’
‘No!’
Though I, in fact, suspected she had checked it before asking.
Or was I overestimating her?

She introduced me to an unknown squirt in the common stream – her co-worker from the brick factory who we met near the Store 1.
A mujik over thirty. 
He said his name, I answered with mine and we immediately forgot what had just heard.
I did not like his smile baring the over-worn gums receded to the teeth roots.
Besides, some uneasiness about him made it clear that the meeting and new acquaintance was not a good news to him.
I regretted we had come up to him at all.

And at the other side of the Under-Overpass, near the Store 5, it was already we to be approached by a half-acquaintance Halimonenko, aka Halimon.
He demanded of Olga a separate talk.
She asked me to wait and walked with him four meters aside on the same two-step porch in front of the store.
Some scraps of words ‘militia’, ‘get not a little’ came to me.
It’s unpleasant to stand pushed aside that way, but so I was asked.

(...another of my pesky traits is doing what I have been asked to without giving it a thought and starting to think when it’s too late…)

Their conversation ended and she returned to me followed by his owner-like ‘I told you!' in her back. 
Olga explained that someone had tried to steal his motorcycle from the shed and he mistakenly decided she had anything to do with all that. 

(...myths are different.
There are useful ones, like the myths of ancient Greece, and useless – as if the army turns young men into manly men.
Bullshit!
Were it so, I’d say to Halimon,
‘This is my woman, talk to me!’
It’s not that I was afraid of him, it’s just that it never occurred to me to say so.
The army hadn’t made a man of me…)

Olga suggested going to the Plant Park on Saturday, where the Pesnedary group from Bakhmach were playing dances. 
It took half an hour by a local train in the Kiev direction to get from Konotop to Bakhmach. 
What kind of group could be from such a backwater?
Olga said they still played well and she would also introduce me to Valentin Batrak, aka Lyalka, the brother of Vitya Batrak, aka Slave.

The Pesnedary sounded very good thanks to their keyboard player – a long guy in the hairstyle of Angela Devis.
‘Smoke on the Water’ by the Deep Purple and ‘Mexico’ by the Chicago band they did quite decently.
Then Lyalka approached and Olga introduced us.

Tall and skinny, with the long fair hair, slightly cocked up atop of the head, he sported a nail-like beard a la Cardinal Richelieu, of the same shade.
Just one look at each other’s enlightened eyes said us that we needed a more secluded place that the dance-floor.

We found such a place, exchanged the credentials and reached consensus in the estimation of the sampled grass quality, and established relations of friendship and cooperation for the coming years...

My father disclosed his strategic plans for implementing my army skills.
His project called for the addition one more room and a veranda to the semi-hutta they had bought, as well as paneling its walls with brick from outside and, at the same breath, construction of a brick shed in the yard.
The shed would be of two sections – one for winter fuel and the second residential, like, summer room.

I felt reluctant to clarify that at the military service my training was concentrated exclusively on using shovel and breaker.
Not that I was ashamed of the fact, but because of he was so happy to start realization of his designs, I couldn't tell him that ‘bricklayer' in my military ID was a complete bullshit.
So I said, yes, of course, no problems. 

A truckload of bricks was brought from the brick factory, a truckload of sand, a half ton of cement and – off went the construction works of the century!

The water source was further away than in the Nezhin Street, besides, the running water system hadn't reached the outskirts of the Settlement and water had to be extracted from a hell-deep well by spinning the crank of a thick tube shaft to wind on it the multi-meter chain until the tin pail of water on its end came up to the daylight. 

That summer was really hot, both in weather and the labor heat. 
The father’s plans became a tangible reality.
The quality?
Well, the seams in masonry are thicker than ideal, but the plumb-line test of jambs and corners still do not make me blush.

 On his arrival home, a dembel had to report to the Military Commissar wearing the parade-crap and get registered there.
 After those proceedings I sent the parcel with the uniform to its owner in the military detachment 41769, thrusting a three-rouble bank-note in the jacket's inner pocket. 
Had the money arrived?

My mother told she also had been putting three rubles in each of her letters to me. 
Couldn’t she have mentioned that at least one time?!
I would have written not to do so because I was receiving just the vanilla letters.
Well, they also were my relief, of course...

Soon after, I received a letter from Stavropol sent by the soldier-clerk at the Staff barracks of the VSO-11.
He did not write a single line, but, as it was arranged between us, put in the envelope a blank sheet of paper with the stamp of the Construction Battalion.
It only remained to fill the page with the testimonial for admission to an institute.

I prepared a text depicting myself very positively as an excellent soldier both at military and political training, and an active participant in the amateur art activities of the battalion, a reliable comrade, an experienced warrior of the Soviet armed forces in general and the military troops in particular. 
Not only zampolits could do the job, after all.

I asked my father to re-write the text on the sheet with the stamp since his handwriting looked more like that of an inveterate officer. 

He copied the list of my virtues, but a bit hesitated at signing the testimonial,
‘What if they catch you?’
I assured him that the Battalion Commander did not recognize his signature himself due to the chronically leaky memory.
Grateful for my valiant labor that summer, my father scribbled a signature (any colonel would be proud of such a one) nearby the seal of the military detachment 41769.

I did not go to Kiev, but, on the advice of my mother, took my papers to the Nezhin State Pedagogical Institute which also had the English Language Department. 
It took only a two-hour ride by a local train to get to Nezhin and I did not care for the institute's pedagogical quirk, most importantly, I would be able to read in English.

For the period of the entrance examinations I, as an applicant was allocated a bed in the hostel in the main square of the Nezhin City opposite the white Lenin statue and the massive building of the City and District Party Committee (two in one) behind his back.

It took one bus stop from the square to the institute was at the next, but on foot much faster.

The English Department was located on the third floor of the Old Building, erected in the times of Decemberists by Count Razumovsky and already in those times of yore, it served as the educational institution for nondescript students along with Gogol, the great Russian writer. 
For that fact, the institution had nailed down to its name the name of N. V. Gogol too. 

I liked the short alley of giant birch-trees in front of the high porch of the Old Building and the wide white columns carrying its pediment, the echoing corridors paved with parquet and high auditorium rooms.
And I liked the Dean of the English Department, named Antonyuk.

Probably, I liked him for not picking holes in my lame knowledge of English.
I do not think he would be as lenient if knowing that my grandfather's name was Joseph, and my father-in-law was Abram. 

Dean Antonyuk was a type of militant anti-Semite.
In dark evenings Antonyuk sneakily crossed with his indignant pencil the names of the teachers of Jewish nationality marked in the time-table of the English Department and in the same manner purged the faculty wall-newspaper hanging by. 
Like a youth from an underground resistance struggling gegen Anzeigen of the occupational authorities of the Third Reich.

But Alexander Bliznyuk, one of the Jewish instructors, as alert as Gestapo, tracked Antonyuk down and caught him red-handed for which the latter lost his position.
However, that happened later.

At the written examination on Russian, I turned out a composition evaluated with ‘good’.
In fact, that was an untraceable plagiarism – an adaptation of the memorable message-statement which Zoya Ilynichna, the teacher of Russian language and literature at the Konotop School 13, rolled out in red ink under my subversive composition about meditations by the window.

And at the oral examination, I luckily took the ticket with the task to describe the character of Prince Andrey from the ‘War and Peace' by Tolstoi. 
However, the examiner took a try at setting me back with an additional question:
‘Tell us some poem of a Soviet poet, anyone of your choice.’
That was, as you call it, a question below the belt, but I recollected that Yesenin also lived for some time under the Soviet regime and began to recite with a restaurant drawl:
‘Oh, my leafless maple,
Ice-coated maple...' 

On the second verse he surrendered and I got a passing score.

In the interval between the exams, I bought a couple of balloons for Lenochka. 
In the trading net of Konotop, these goods appeared too rarely and I did not like her playing with an old suitcase which she preferred to the pair of worn out dolls of hers. 
She pulled  the suitcase out of the bedroom in the middle of the kitchen and announced:
‘Cry, Grandma! Grandpa, cry! Lenochka is leaving for the BAM!’

It was about a year already that the Central TV news program ‘Time’ each evening presented reports of labor achievements at the construction of the railway track of the Baikal-Amur Mainline, aka BAM.

‘Come to me at the BAM,
And we'll have it on the rails,
I’m not a stuck-up ma’am...’

I did not like that the child was growing too over-politicized, and remembered how on the Object we loved to play balloons.

And so, lying in the evening on the hostel cot, I smoked and the cigarette smoke swam up to the ceiling and, with nothing better to do, prompted me to conduct an experiment in physics.
By its behavior that smoke clearly demonstrated that it was lighter than the air.
Now, if we had a balloon filled with smoke the balloon had to fly!
It remained only to solve the technical problem of how to get the smoke into the balloon.

Life experience came to the rescue.
The stoners had a way of brotherly assistance to each other ensuring a swift lift high as a kite, the trick code-named ‘locomotive’.
One of bro took a sparked joint with the burning end into his mouth, observing, of course, precautions as not to get burnt, and blew.
As a result, a dense thick smoke was pouring from the tube-mouthpiece of the Belomor-Canal cigarette and immediately consumed by the other stoner.
But for a balloon a straight cigarette would also do, right?

I lit it, inserted the mouthpiece into the balloon neck, and blew from the other end a lungful of air.

However, let's not forget, that the ‘locomotive' smoke gets swallowed by the consumer, whereas the air encased in a balloon escapes the rubber body through its neck. 
In short, the amount of the smoke-mixed air that I had blown in burst back through the mouthpiece and knocked the smoldering tobacco out, straight into my throat.

(...’when a dog has nothing to do, he licks his balls’ my father used to say.
Sometimes it's better to lick than tamper with aeronautics…) 

Sure enough, I coughed the tobacco out, but its fire burned my larynx somewhere behind the glands.
That’s what happens when a philologist meddles with physics matters.
First, it hurts, and secondly, go to pharmacies in search of furacilin for treating burns. 

(...but the most hurting, hurting to tears, that even this experience could not prevent my future follies.
Certain morons are not able to learn from their own experience because of it is not possible to foresee which other locomotives with balls will enter my inquisitive head tomorrow…)

I was enrolled as a first-year student, but the triumphant departure to Konotop was somewhat clouded by having words with the commandant of the hostel.
He found a shortage of one pane in the window of my room.
The glass had been missing even when I move in there, but the jackass did not except any explanations demanding retribution in ready money or finding a workman who would insert the pane.
I did not have the amount indicated and I resented the injustice of the ripping-off.
When left alone in the room, I went up to the upper floor and pulled the glass from the window in the toilet.
The size fitted perfectly.
How I love standardization!

The commandant, however, found fault that the glass had obviously been in use.
I justified myself by buying it on hands in the bazaar, where I did not notice the traces of paint along the edges...

Olga did not like the whole idea of my getting a higher education, especially for the profession of a teacher.
She did not consider English as a specialty at all.
Everyone nowadays should know the language, so she was told by a baby doctor once called to treat Lenochka's cold. 
I responded by calling the doctor dirty smartie and the promise to come to Konotop each Saturday.
She stopped carping but demanded my submission to her wish of dying my hair with hydrogen peroxide.

That's why in the all-out picture of the 1975 first-year students at the English Department of the Nezhin State Pedagogical Institute, aka NGPI, I look as it befits the Hero of our Time – a blond with a dark mustache...

Our course was divided into four groups of twelve students each with only one male among them.
Exactly the same male-female percentage ratio was maintained at all the courses of the English Department.

Because of my being a dyed blond, some local youth with intonations of the boy from Nalchik started to show his close attention.
Shocked by a vivid sample of the construction battalion parlance, he left me alone but tragically announced that his life was broken – he didn’t go to Moscow because of me, though he could.

Olga immediately informed me that I was hanging out with gays in Nezhin.
On my demand to indicate the source of the falsehood, she mentioned a certain Shoorik whose sister studied at the Mathematics Department of the NGPI.

At my request, Lyalka called Shoorik out of the dance-floor into a dark alley to have a talk with me.
I hit the summoned Shoorik on the jaw and he ran away.
I didn’t pursue but only shouted after him in the construction battalion manner:
‘Come here, fucker!’
A strange way to bring a runaway back, if you come to think about it...

The classes in the Old Building lasted from nine to almost three and then I went along the wide asphalt path towards the New Building tiled with sandstone.
In front of it stretched a row of thick sprawling willows hiding under their canopies long benches without backrest.
In thirty meters from the New Building's corner lumped the red-brick five-story block of the student hostel, the Hosty. 

Opposite the hostel there stood a tall two-story canteen in a cubes-and-glass style.
The large hall on the second floor was filled with a crowd of square four-person tables, and the babel of students' voices, with the swish of water in the dishwasher, the clatter of kitchen utensils, the knock of plates with chosen havvage against the plastic trays, which were dragged over narrow rails along the kitchen towards the woman seated at the checkout counter in the end of the rail-path in the  white rigid tube of cloth upon her head.
The order of nuns-cashiers.

A fleeting glance at the tray contents and the cashier read the verdict—from 60 kop. to 1 ruble, accepted the payment, gave the change and clicked the next check from her clanging box to add it to a heap of the same paper scraps.

At times some students with a quirk for research took the same set of food while in different places of the moving line – just so, from purely scientific curiosity. 
The cost of such control sets varied.
The cashier created the price on the fly, by inspiration, taking into account the client's appearance, the weather conditions outside and the level of noise in the hall. 

After finishing their meal, visitors went to the first floor past the shortest embodiment of human wisdom E = mc2, inscribed on the wall of the staircase landing.
An empty stomach makes one deaf to learning, as a Russian proverb runs, and after the meal, the theory of relativity might turn more comprehensible, you never can say.

(…by the by, it’s a moot point who’s wiser – Einstein or the guy that had found such a correct place for application of his formula…)

On the first floor, there was the eternally locked hall of celebrations, where weddings were held twice a year. 

Going out onto the high porch you could still turn into a glass door of a small confectionery with two saleswomen in nun whites and the usual assortment of sand cakes for 22 kop., two-day-old donuts and tobacco products.
Cigarettes were not too good – on a dampish side, except for ‘Belomor-Canal' of the most excellent quality – dry, stuffed with pliable tobacco fiber, which is very important. 
Once, being on high, I demanded from the saleswomen ‘The Ledger of Complaints and Proposals’ and scribbled thanks to this account, ending with the words ‘be blessed, dearest dears!’
A graphomaniac would always find occasion to give vent to his hidden passion.

Now you could return to the five-story Hosty.
On the two-step porch at the entrance three columns of wide-section iron pipes supported the flat concrete canopy.
Each of the pipes, when hit against, produced a different tone.
You could play on them ‘do-re-mi-do-re-do!’, so precise were the pitch intervals issued by the iron pipes.

There was the Department of Music Teachers at the NGPI, but the honor of that musical discovery belonged to a student of English Department who graduated before my enrollment.
As for the musical phrase itself, it was an old-time curse among the laboohs.
Wherever you played it any labooh that happened around would clearly understand that you were saying:
‘Go and fuck your ass-hole!’
One syllable for each note.

Behind the glazed entrance door, there was a small transparent vestibule with the next door into the lobby. 

In the corner on the right, the desk of the on-duty watchwoman stood under the square shield of plywood fixed on the wall and studded with rows of nails for hanging the keys to the rooms of the Hosty. 
If the nail under the written in ink number 72 was empty that meant one of my roommates was in the room together with the key.

In the long corridor behind the lobby you could turn to the right or to the left to reach the staircases to the upper floors, but the left one was the shorter route to room 72.

The floors were divided between the departments, aka faculties.
The second floor was inhabited by the students of Biology Department, aka biofac.
English Department, aka anglofac, possessed the third floor. 
Mathematicians from phizmat lived on the fourth floor, and the uppermost—fifth—floor belonged to Music-Pedagogical Department, aka muzped. 

On any floor from the staircase landing, you entered a long half-dark corridor. 
The light got into it from two windows at the opposite ends of the corridor, each one from the floor to the ceiling.
The rest of the scenery was made of walls with closed doors above the dark gray ground concrete of the floor.
Room 72 was next to the washroom of six sinks by the corridor window.
The door to the men’s toilet was on the other side of the same window.

On the opposite end of the long corridor everything was exactly the same, only the toilet there was for the ladies.

On entering the room you got into the narrowest part of it squeezed between the four plywood lockers up to the ceiling—two of them from each side.
After the lockers, the room became a bit wider, with a bed, a cabinet-box, and another bed under the walls on both sides. 
The wide, three-winged window was right ahead with two more cabinet-boxes under its sill.
 
The center of the room was occupied by a dark brown table with four chairs pushed under it – otherwise, you couldn't go to the window. 

The soiled and partly tattered wallpaper hid the walls.
The round tin box in the center of the white-through-dust ceiling contained the light bulb.
There also were two wall sockets and the switch by the door.

However, from midnight till six in the morning the electricity in the rooms was turned off by the on-duty watchwoman with the switch by the lobby on the first floor.

For those eager to gnaw the granite of the science there was a reading room on the first floor next to the hall with a TV box.
In both the electricity was in place all night through.
However, the reading room got empty long before the midnight and the hall with the TV as well, unless an international football match or a new television movie with Andrey Mironov were broadcast.


All the three of my roommates in the pencil-box room were four-year students.

Fyodor Velichko came from a hinterland village in the vast Ukraine-Mommy.
The straight thick hair jutting above his wide forehead was somehow reminiscent of the straw-thatched barn roof on a quiet farm. 

Sasha Ostrolootsky was brought up and educated in an orphanage but he was going to marry the daughter of Professor Sokolov from Moscow.
No one except him ever met or heard about both Professor or his daughter.
Like Fyodor, he was not very tall, but more sporty.
The favorite pastime of Ostrolootsky was visiting girls' rooms on the floor to drink tea with sweets. 
He had straight fair hair, a long nose and the reputation of Casanova.

Marc Novoselitsky from Kiev often accompanied Sasha to the tea parties.
Marc had a broad face with icicles of black hair hanging to the rim of his glasses and indispensable grin under thin mustache. 
He was the most well-fed in the room.

Visiting the room of Sveta Havkina and three more freshman girls Marc and Sasha paid for her tea and jam with most black ingratitude.
Sprawling on the covered beds of girls they started to sneer and jeer at those most unworthy people – the Jews.

Sveta, a pretty black-haired daughter of one of the tribes of Israel from Chernigov, was changing in the face to each of their anti-Semitic remarks but suffered in silence. 
The next two days she was utterly out of sorts until Ilyusha Lipes, a third-year student with sideburns like in Pushkin’s self-portraits did explain to her that those ungrateful pigs were actually Jews themselves.

The four-year student Yasha Demyanko from Poltava rented a room somewhere in the city but visited his course-mates almost every evening. 

We spend evenings playing ‘throw-in fool’.
Yasha was the strongest player and he was the tallest of all too.
He had a long Baltic face framed with long curls.
And he, like Fyodor, spoke only and exclusively the Ukrainian language.
The rest of us communicated in Russian but we all perfectly understood each other.

The fourth-year student Sveta, a native of Nezhin city, kept visiting our room on a regular basis. 
She was the official bride of Marc and their respective parents had already been acquainted.
She did not play cards, she sat on Marc’s and only Marc’s bed and held him in an iron grip,
‘What’s that, Marik? I did not get it!’
‘Well, Svetik, well, I just...’ with cowedly lowered eyes behind his glasses Marc began to meekly defense himself until the other players would show their indignation with the delay of his move in the game.

Then he escorted her home, returned and after the turn off of electricity in the room, he brought in his course-mate Katranikha
For a couple of minutes, they silently creaked his bed and parted.
And that was correct because of the exacting study-work awaiting us all in the morning...

Katranikha had a friendly disposition and she was very hospitable.
One burglar after having broken into the Republican Fashion House in Kiev decided it was time to lie low.
He got off a local train in Nezhin and spent a week in her room because they met each other on that train.
And he every evening took her and her roommates to the both of Nezhin restaurants.
At the end of the week two operative officers of the criminal investigation, following the traces of the fabrics stolen from the Republican Fashion House, which the burglar tried to sell at the Nezhin bazaar, climbed the third floor of the Hosty. 
One of them took a black pistol from inside his coat and knocked on the door of Katranikha’s room, but the burglar had already disappeared.
He was arrested only a month later in the Mariupol city.
Anyway, that was what the operative with the black pistol told his wife, also a four-year student of the English Department...

Once Katranikha invited me to the Leninist Komsomol cinema, about two hundred meters from the Canteen opposite to the lake in the Count's Park. 
We watched ‘Zorro’ with Alain Delon.
Well, I do not know, but in my humble opinion, the scene of the final fencing in the movie was too boring long. 
On the whole, in vain she spent so much time on me, I couldn’t use her for practical purposes because she was a girl of my cohabitant in the pencil-box room.
After all, I always remained somewhat old-fashioned.

Becoming I a student I never fancied breaching the marital fidelity.
Not even in my thought.
For about a week.
And then there appeared some vacant room on the floor, and there popped up the key to its door, and, in addition, there was my course-mate Irina from Bakhmach.
We spent a night in that room until dawn.
She turned out an ardent follower of tactile pleasures with the firm stance on not trespassing the rubber band in her panties. 
Again?! What for?!
She had magnificent boobs, no doubt, with some strange nipples though.
I had never come across such tiny ones: the size of a pinhead. 
However, be busy all night long with a bust only is a hell of monotonous occupation.

Two days later she resolutely blocked my way in the half-dark corridor of the Hosty.
‘You did not say you were married!’
‘You hadn’t asked.’

(...and that, in my opinion, is the main flaw in civilization.
Take, for example, me, I have nothing but the purest and most natural inclination for an honest transaction following the pattern of ‘you give me, I give you’, that is for fair pleasure exchange.
I am prepared to provide all the pleasures she’s looking for from my male body in exchange for delights obtainable from her female one.
But instead of a young Bacchante rocking with mad ecstasy in my arms I—for the damnteenth time!—run into the disgusting fact of using the vagina as a trap.
Bitter are the fruits of yours, civilization!
Toy with the boobs and piss off!
Marry first, and then have it by spoonfuls, or spread on the bread if you like so.
And no one cares a fig about your shattered self-respect.
Couldn't arise a fiery response? 
Hmm… and calling yourself a man after that, eh?

And—the most perplexing puzzle—a mere outline of the word ‘rape' causes erection in me, but I cannot translate this term into life even with the recusant who lay with me of her own free will. 
She says ‘no' and I start to tame my uptightness whatever the cost. 
Probably, because of I love fair deals.
Besides, I was born too late – after the origination of the family, private property, and state...) 

Presently the buses in the Nezhin city stop next to the railway station, but in those times the highway bridge over the tracks was not in place yet and the bus stops were reached by the high pedestrian bridge.
Then you had to wait for a bus, scramble to get on board and stand squeezed in the crowd all the long ride to the main square.
From the square remained a short walk down to the bridge over the river of Oster on the right bank of which stood the Hosty, the Old and the New, and other buildings of the institute with the Count's Park behind them supporting the sky on its columns of dark ancient elms bordered with a long horseshoe-like lake... 

Once I spent the whole ride from the station to the main square persuading Yasha Demyanko to sell me a shirt.
A white shirt with a grid of widely set blue and yellow stripes.
Yasha brought that shirt from his native Poltava for selling at a negotiated price and in the bus crowd showed it me from his grip.
I wanted it at once, but he did not agree to sell because he was wearing the same shirt and both of us were from the same Department.
It’s not the right thing for two people to be dressed alike.
I had to swear that I would put it on only with his permission when his one was washed or left behind in Poltava.

(...we lived in the deficiency era and were well aware of it.
I wasn’t shocked that a course-mate of mine, sitting next to me at a general lecture, wore pantyhose mended with a blue isolation tape.
So what?
When she walked the tape did not flash from under her skirt while the pantyhose were of "made in Italy" type…)

Fyodor, Yasha and I became bosom friends on the basis of dry wine.
After classes, we went to the grocery store around the corner from the church where Bogdan Khmelnitsky got married one of his wives and bought four or five bottles containing 0.75 liters of white dry wine. 
Yasha was a supporter of moderation and his dose was just one in the haul. 
Fyodor and I followed more liberal views.

From the store, we proceeded past the bazaar and the restaurant Polissya to the second bridge over the Oster river, behind which the long Red Partisans' Street eventually took right turn to the highway beyond the city. 
But our route was much shorter, from the bridge we descended into the tall grass on the river bank near the Catholic Chapel and lay there down for a libation. 
The wine bottles bottom bore a finger-thick layer of sediment but we knew how to drink from the neck without stirring it up.

The emptied bottles we threw into the almost motionless waters of Oster because somewhere downstream the floodgates of the dam were shut. 
After short reproachful popping, the bottles froze on the water, like a fishing rod float pointing their necks to the sky.

(...environmental pollution fighters would not approve of our line of behavior, but young carefree students are not turned on so minor issues. 
Besides, when compared to the student exploits of Mikhail Lomonosov at German universities, we were a flock of white-wool lambs. 
Reading about his feats you grow to understand it was not for nothing that the man had walked on foot from Arkhangelsk itself to Moscow.
Passion for knowledge knows where to haul you…)

And lying in the grass we conducted enlightened conversations about this and that and other things, between prolonged gulps for a change. 

About the well-known fact that when the Oster was still navigable there sank a merchant boat with treasures.
And recently the Japanese came up with a proposal that they would clean up the entire river of Oster provided that they get the treasure, but ours answered: ‘Piss off, Japs! Don't be too cunning!’

And that the Latinist Litvinov was a ruthless beast.
‘Read sentence seven from exercise five.’
But how could you possibly read it when seeing for the first time in your life?
‘Sentence seven comes after sentence six.’
‘…..’
‘Sentence seven comes before sentence eight.’
‘…..’
‘Get seated. Your mark is two.’
Coldly serene. Unperturbed.
And his head like a light bulb, only with a little more hair on it.
So poor students had no other choice but to dub him with the handle of 'Lupus'.

His beautiful wife was a fourth-year student already, and in her first year, in the winter examination session, she managed to pass the credit in Latin only at the sixth go. 
He put his signature in her matriculation book and said:
‘Be smart and marry me.’
She figured it out that in the summer session it would be not a credit but the examination and understood that a resistance was impossible... 

And we agreed that when Fyodor and Yasha got their diplomas at their farewell party I would wander into the water of Oster with a glass of champagne in my hand.
Like in the film ‘The Land of Sannikov’ a lieutenant of the tsarist army enters the rolling surf after the schooner sailing away to the discoveries.

‘There is a point between the past and the future,
And that split second is what we call life...’

And then we, happily mushy, rose from the grass and went to the Hosty overtaking the lazy bottles still sticking from the middle of the river.

(...we lived in the era of Stagnation only we did not know about it yet…)

In the blue-tiled shower on the first floor of the hostel, I made a discovery that I had a very resonant voice.
So I brought my guitar from Konotop and sang from the window of my room on the third floor to no one in particular.

Irina from Bakhmach seemed to have notified the Artemises at the English Department that I was not a kosher game.
As a result, the sweet sadness in the eyes of girls had given way to an expression of alert vigilance and my entering their rooms was no more followed by an invitation to have a tea-party.
But I sang all the same.

Sometimes students of the Musical Department descended from their fifth floor to our room and asked to borrow the guitar at least for one evening. 
Probably, they wanted to have a rest…

And at the end of September, when our course students went to the wedding of Galya from Borzna, I was strumming and singing there all night from the repertoire of the Orpheuses, the Orion, and Duke Ellington. 
And people danced to my music!

The slender bride in a long white dress, pressing herself to the massive figure of the groom, threw grateful looks to me.
Her brother shooed off from the record player those who wanted to put a disk.
Not every wedding could boast of having a ‘live’ music...

In the beginning of October, I was summoned to the personnel department of the State Pedagogical Institute. 
The head of the personnel department, without looking into my face, urged me to pass into the additional room behind his office desk but he himself remained where he was.
In the adjacent room, there also was a desk with a lanky man at it. 
He had a shaven face of about forty years old and pale-dark hair of indistinct length.
At my entering the room he clasped the fingers of his long hands on top of the desk and introduced himself as a captain of the Committee of State security, aka KGB, and passed on explaining that to prevent the espionage activities of the CIA agents coming to our country under the disguise of news correspondents, the KGB needed young people who spoke English.
Subsequently, such people, after appropriate special training, would be sent to foreign countries to ensure the security of our state.

Wow! Wild dreams had come true without asking the precinct militiaman Solovey! 
A captain of KGB was making me an offer which was too hard to refuse.
Not for nothing in my adolescent dreams I was trying on the shirt of Banionis from ‘The Dead Season’!
It only remained to discuss the details.

If after classes on my way to the hostel I’d see him with a newspaper in hands, then one hour later I would need to call him at the given number for further instructions.
And we parted at that.

A week later, when I called him with the payphone in the glass-walled compartment in the lobby of the hostel, he instructed me to come to the railway station and to the wooden house of the station militia, near the public toilet, and enter the first door to the right in its corridor. 

Behind that door, under his dictation, I wrote the application to enlist me in the secret contingent of the KGB and for purposes of the conspiracy, I chose the name ‘Pavel' to be my working pseudonym. 
 
At our third meeting, the captain said that the response from the military detachment where I had served my army service made it clear that its command staff entertained a very poor opinion of me. 
Like, I was incredibly lost and hopelessly spoiled fraction of the society dregs.

(...it seems like at the KGB everything was turned upside down – first, they recruited me as a secret agent and then started collecting information if that was worth the while. 
Although, I also was, probably, to blame, in part, for too beautiful presenting me in the forged testimonial.
Quoting the great sage, auto crane driver Gavkalov from SMP-615 (of whom later on), what is too good is not good at all…) 

I asked if Zampolit reported also of my participation in a bank robbery, to which the captain grinned but all the same wished to know why the Commander was so negative in his estimation.

The reason supposed by me was not an absolute fantasy fiction.
I just substituted myself for the projectionist at the construction battalion club whom Zampolit trusted with running errands and passing presents to his (Zampolit’s) young passions.
By my version, it was I who accidentally slept with one of the girls who inadvertently blabbed it to Zampolit who, in his turn, flew in a jealous rage and consequently made of me a rowdy and drug user. 

After that conversation, the halo of my dream of becoming a spy in the USA grew dim. 
It dawned on me that I might have been needed for local use only, just as a snitch, ‘a Gestapo’s ear inserted into Everyman’s pocket’.

The future confirmed my gloomy misgivings.
There were no more talks about intelligence service school (the bullshit served for a fool’s bait) instead, twice a month I came to the room in the station militia corridor to report that I hadn’t heard any political discussions among the students of the NGPI.

On one hand, I felt guilty for letting down the captain and the hopes he placed on me, but on the other – what could I report?

That Igor Recoon, my course-mate who entered the institute right from school, fell in love with Olga Zhidova from Chernigov?

All the evenings he spent in her room and her room-mates exploited the feelings of the young enamored sending him with a kettle to bring water from a tap in the washroom.
Once he was checked in the corridor by my room-mate, the four-year student Marc Novoselitsky.
‘Made an errand-boy of you, eh?’ asked Marc with his usual mocking grin.
‘So what?' the yesterday's schoolboy did not give in and threw up his sharp nose with the tea-colored glasses, chewing, with an independent attitude, his bubble gum. 
‘In love with Olga Zhidova, eh?’
‘So what?’
‘Wanna marry her, eh?’
‘So what?’
‘How can you marry if I have been fucking her?’
‘So what?’
Igor withstood that final blow.
Only the treacherous kettle slightly lowered its spout in his slackened hand letting thread thin trickle onto the gray concrete floor.
Poor boy...

My roommate did not lie, of course, and he explained his action as the desire to save young Igor from a fatal blunder.
But all the same that Novoselitsky was a mean bastard, notwithstanding his being a Jew...

In short, I had nothing to curry favor with the KGB and mend my reputation ruined by Zampolit.

(...but if they had turned a blind eye to his knocking on me, and the fact of baptizing my daughter, and the insult to a KGB worker at the Komsomol Gorka in Stavropol city then—who knows?—I might have easily risen to the presidency in present Russia even without the spy school.
My mother always said that I was clever.

In fact, I poisoned my student years with my own hands.
Two meetings a month with the captain were exhausting me like an incurable toothache.
I tried to kill the thoughts of nearing meeting and think of something... anything else, but they returned to me as to the patient with a deadly illness return the thoughts about the inescapable end. 
At the time of most Lomonosov-like feasts, I would suddenly remember that in three days I was to go to a hateful meeting. 
Or I started pondering on the word ‘seccol’, aka secsot, which was just an abbreviation of ‘secret collaborator’ but sounded much more disgusting than ‘chmo’.

And there was no escape – they had my application and reports telling on no one in particular but signed ‘Pavel’.
So even if I, say, got to a zona, another ‘zampolit’ would approach with the demand to keep on knocking on those around, if I had no wish of a certain part in KGB archives to be leaked to the master-thief of the zona, aka ‘pahan’.

My life became cramped up like that of Sindbad the Seaman when in some of his travels a nasty old man nestled around his neck strangling and kicking with his legs for any disobedience.

But why the KGB captain remained nameless?
He called me his name-and-patronymic but even under the threat of being executed, I cannot recollect it. 
Not that I’m afraid of the KGB, or whatever its new name is – no; it’s just a permanent brain cramp at that point.
I can strain my memory as much as I want and still, there's no name. 
Though not that I really want it…) 

There were two restaurants in Nezhin in those times – ‘Polissya’ in the square in front of the bazaar, and ‘The Seagull’ in the hotel of the same name to the right from the City-and-District Party Committee behind Lenin's back on the main square.
The third one was on the first floor of the railway station but in the afternoon it worked as a canteen so I count it out. 

The epic provincial backwaters arising tenderness even by a thought of it... 
Even the square in front the bazaar was, actually, just a wide street descending from the bridge to the department store.

We visited restaurants seldom indeed, and even then not all because of Yasha and Fyodor always skipped.
On such occasions, they were replaced with Sveta, the official bride of Marc. 

Long white tablecloths on the tables and the wide green runner from the entrance up to the screen in the corner hiding the window to the kitchen showed at once that it was a restaurant for you and not a shabby bar. 
And, as it’s appropriate for a restaurant, we had to wait and wait before the waitress would bring the ordered goulash with potatoes.
To make the long wait shorter, Sasha Ostrolootsky would start rubbing the set of spoon-fork-knife lined on the tablecloth in front of him with a restaurant napkin.
Like, he’s so cleanly.
It’s good he didn’t set his little finger aside when at the procedure.
Some Marquis de Orphanage.

Sveta as always nagged Marc with her ‘What’s that, Marik? I didn’t get it!’ but in a low kind of voice.
Finally, from behind the screen, the waitress appeared with a tray in her hands.
No.
Took it to another table.

But here and to us already.
She moved the plates from the tray onto the table.
Sasha business-like poured vodka from the small and round, like the flask in chemical experiments, decanter.
Shoot off!

And after the second shot, you were already a participant in a witty conversation of the amiable table-mates. 
Your fingers toyed so smartly with the fork.
Music from the loudspeakers behind the screen was no longer sounding too sharp.
You unobtrusively gazed around the room.
Which one to invite to a slow dance on the green runner?

Marc knew them all, from which Department, say, those two girls and even in what year of study.
If that was someone not from the Institute, then Sveta, as a local guide, would present all their intimate details.
Golden youth. 
Burners of life.

In the end, Marc would pay for all from his soft brown purse; at the hostel, we reimbursed for our shares. 

Marc would be a quite good guy, but for his love to teach you.
Coming back from the shower on the first floor, he made sure to peep into the lobby to thank the watchwoman Auntie Dinna for the hot water.
And then he started to drive it home to me that although she had nothing to do with the water yet now she was prepared to do him favors. 
It’s like promising something for someone.
Nobody can tell if you were going to keep the word and they would really have what you had promised but the person you promised it to is already looking into your hands and, in their state of expectation, would pull for you.

(...it seems to me, he was just repeating things that his father had been teaching him since early childhood.
Jewish wisdom transferred from generation to generation.
That’s from whom the KGBists learned to hook fools with promises of the spy school…)

To pay for his lectures, I gave him the book ‘The Otranto Castle' which he saw on my cabinet-box and liked. 
It was borrowed from the library at KaPeVeRrZe Club.
So, I had to return the book first and next Sunday I stole it from the shelves.
It’s easy.
You stuck a book under your trousers belt inside your overcoat and then took one more to register at the librarian desk...

The feasts in our room were cheaper.
Yasha and Fyodor were dispatched after Calvados in flattened bottles.
Ostrolootsky and I went to the kitchen.

On each floor of the Hosty, there were two kitchens, located by the entrance to the corridor from the staircase landings. 
Each kitchen was furnished with two gas stoves, one water tap above its sink and three rows of box doors, like in automatic storage chambers, only not of iron but of pressed chipwood.
There we were cleaning potatoes on the window sill.
A huge lot of potatoes.
Sasha had a sporty look with the zipper of his jacket always swayed up to the utmost where the slider dangled under his chin.
'Okay, that’ll do. Now we’ll cut the potatoes. 
You go to the door. Just lean against it.
That’s right.
Let’s see what we have here...’

Ostrolootsky opened a box door and unloaded a piece of butter onto the huge frying pan.
‘Oh, and here some nice onions, excellent!’
He checked the boxes with such elegant ease that I not immediately realized that we were robbing the provision, aka ‘torbas’, of the girls from our Department.
All went so deftly and smoothly the tongue wouldn’t turn to call it theft.

(...well, Okay, Sasha might be justified by his half-starved childhood in an orphanage but I?
How would I look into Robin Hood’s eyes after all that?
And yet (with all the remorse in its place) I haven't eaten anything more delicious than that Hosty's fried potatoes...
Though, Calvados is a lousy swill. 
To drink it even for getting rid of a hangover is disgusting…)

Zhora Ilchenko came back from India.
After his second year at the Institute, he was sent there to work at the Soviet embassy and now returned to finish his studies. 
The books he bought while abroad started to circulate among the English Department students.

I did not know Zhora and only saw him in the Old Building corridors from afar.
He had a curly, rapidly thinning hair and a mustache above his red lips.
It goes without saying, that I envied him—one whole year in India!—and from my course-mate Igor Recoon I borrowed a book which he borrowed from Zhora for reading.
It was a volume of Short Stories by William Somersault Maugham published by the Penguin Publishing House.
The book was difficult to read because of lots of too tricky words.
I had to borrow a Large English-Russian Dictionary from Natasha Zhaba, my group-mate.

In the book borrowed from Igor, borrowed from Zhora, I came across a quite short (no more than three pages) story named ‘The man with a scar' and its size prompted me the idea of translating it into Russian. 
Moreover, that there was a place for publishing it – on the third floor of the Old Building in front of the door to the language laboratory there hang the wall newspaper ‘Translator’ with rows of typewritten pages of students’ translations glue-mounted in it, next to the Time-Table of Lessons at the English Department.

Even being so short, the story presented the very essence of all those Latin American revolutionaries.
A to-do list for such a revolutionary was not too complicated – to rally a gang, to adorn oneself with the rank of colonel or general and to start a war for liberation under the slogan ‘Liberty or Death!’ until he becomes the dictator.

However, the would-be dictator from the story ran out of ammunition and got captured before becoming the dictator.
At dawn, leaving for a moment his gang lined by the wall for the execution, he stabbed his beloved to death, when she came running up to him to say goodbye. 
Because they loved each other so much.
The current dictator, being present at the execution, was impressed with such a passion.
The man was taken aside from his gang and after the firing squad did their job he was deported to a neighboring Latin American State.
And there he became a drunkard selling lottery tickets at bars.
Once a bottle of beer burst in his hands and a splinter of glass left the scar on his face.
That's how he became the man with a scar.

Just so simple a story without affectation frills. 
However, Maugham knows the way to present concise but tangible details in his stories.
He’s some real writer that son of a foggy Albion, fog it!

(...the words in English are short, except for borrowed from other languages, and a sentence in it looks like a handful of scattered rice but might, at the same time, contain heaps of meanings that would fill a whole sack.
In Russian, on the contrary, the words, because of their suffixes and prefixes, are long like spaghetti, or threads of cobweb with which you have to spin and weave what, actually, you are about…)

The wall newspaper ‘Translator' was edited by the teacher of theoretical grammar or something like that being studied in the senior courses of the English Department. 
Alexander Vasilyevich Zhomnir.
A capital man.

(...nowadays such an individual would be considered a regular screwball, but then it meant a dissident they hadn't run down yet…)

Outwardly, he looked more like a Ukranian nationalist than a dissident, but all the same too cunning to be caught, otherwise he would not be allowed to teach at an institute.
His long gray hair he combed back but it immediately fell back on his broad forehead and reached his thick gray brows.
He kept his shoulders a bit upwards, as if preparing to take a sack of potatoes on them and in his movements there was felt that sort of clumsiness which needed years of cultivation.
A villager beekeeper, or, say, a miller who had bored his way up to a professor of linguistic neurosurgery. 
To the institute, he was coming by his bicycle, like a mujik, yet fastened it with a padlock intellectually inserted through the spokes. 

In the corridor by the language laboratory, I handed Zhomnir a thin copybook with my translation from Maugham. 
He flipped through it and stated in a too diligent Russian that he did not work with Russian texts, therefore everything in ‘Translator’ was in Ukrainian except for the translated poems...

Yes, in my school certificate the Ukranian language and literature were marked with ‘n/c’ – ‘not certified’ but after moving to Konotop I was reading Ukrainian books as well.

Two weeks later I brought Zhomnir a Ukrainian version of the same man with a scar.
He bucked up and with a glow of satisfaction in his eyes he crucified and crumbled my labors to the finest dust.
I hated to be flogged like that yet I couldn't but see that he was right.
And I couldn't just dump the whole venture not because of wounded pride but of being hooked by wrestling with obstinate Slavonic words in my attempts to express what I was able to comprehend in the rolling beads of Maugham's language. 
The struggle was so exciting that I took the guitar back to Konotop...

The rumors I became aware of one year later that arriving at Konotop on Saturdays I threw my black plastic ‘diplomat' in the hallway and went immediately to whores not caring a bean about the fact that my wife was spreading for any other guy both regularly and spontaneously, were a gross exaggeration. 
My relations with Olga remained constant, invariably turbulent and brought a feeling of deep satisfaction.
Except for that one instance which I was timing.

My roommate Marc Novoselitsky for no obvious reason suddenly asked me about the duration of my having sex with my wife. 
Ashamedly I had to admit it was ten to fifteen minutes, no longer.
He started to laugh at such a big lie exceeding the limits of the possible and we bet...

Olga did not get it why I had brought the alarm clock from the kitchen to the bedroom, yet I did not enter into explanations.
Its clacking in my brains led to a miserable result.
Returning to Nezhin on Sunday evening I honestly confessed to Marc that I had only five-minute run and he blossomed into delight.
But the rest of the time it was all right – the minutes were losing any meaning... 

Before it, we were visiting the Loony and danced slow dances with the profound feeling and fast ones with the vigorous drive. 
She was good at it in any style.

We watched a couple of fights on the floor, which Lyalka named gladiatorial bull-battles, and left the hall for the unlit corridor in the library wing.
Leaning with our backs against the tall window-sill of the tacitly black panes behind us Lyalka and I smoked a joint with gradually deepening comprehension of the aquarium essence of the surrounding interior; Olga was smoking her cigarettes with a red filter. 
Everything became nyshtyak and the thoughts of my being a rat in Nezhin retreated to the very bottom of the aquarium...

I did my matrimonial duty as best as I could and when Olga said she was pregnant and by the regulations, the husband had to donor one glass of his blood in the hospital I went there without much ado, though, like, I had always tried to be protective. 

In the room for blood transfusions, I was shod in white shoe covers and laid on the table covered with a cold oilcloth. 
There were two nurses in the room and I was amazed at their eyes expression, or, rather the lack of it in their looks.
Their eyes seemed blinded by a dull screen like those of dead fish.
With a needle on the end of the flexible hose, they approached me and tried to stick it into the vein inside my arm so that the blood flowed through the hose. 
With three attempts they did not manage to pierce the vein which stubbornly rolled away from the needle inserted under the skin.
In bewilderment, they pitied me and put their mark in the paper to certify I had given blood for a free of charge abortion...

I couldn’t surrender and I did not want to.
I had to study one more writing—similar to Arabic ligature but with a wider sweep—the handwriting of Zhomnir with which he’d been making notes above and between the lines of my manuscripts.
And the day came when he raised a bushy brow and said that it was something like that now and the translation could be placed in the next issue of ‘Translator’.

Yasha and Fyodor, standing in front of the typewritten pages pasted in the wall newspaper, congratulated Zhomnir on discovering a new talent in the field of Ukrainian translations with such a truly Ukranian ending in his last name – Ogolts-OFF.
Zhomnir responded in a simpler way – it was not his fault that such truly-truly Ukrainians as Demyan-KO and Velich-KO had never scratched their ass in all four years of studying at English Department...

Spring came and together with it the most cloudless and unalloyed love of my love.
Everyone named her Shvycha, but I called her Nadya.
She revived in me the belief that true female principle is still alive in this civilization-scummed world. 
We loved each other.
We were filled with love to the brim and over it.
Love for the sake of love is a lovable love, is the purest form of love, if you love it.

Why am I stating for both?
What’s the reason for so bold allegations?
It’s very simple – Nadya was a virgin inexperienced yet in pretense.

So maybe I once again forgot to say I was married?
The fact needed no advertising, she was finishing her fourth year at English Department and lived on the same floor in the Hosty. 

Some unique combination: virginity and the fourth course of anglofac.

‘There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, 
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy...’

The four-year student guys held a banquet in their pencil-box room opposite ours to which they called me too.
Nadya and I happened to be sitting on the same bed and when someone turned off the light I reflexively opened the zipper on her sports jacket.
She pulled it back at once and when they turned the light on everything was innocence itself and no need to call the police morale.
But Marc had heard the sound of sliding zipper in the dark and started to mock.
Nadya got hurt and left and all was over.

The next day she met me in the long corridor on our floor in the same sports suite, spoke to me and smiled.
Oh, the smile of Nadya was a real thing!
Those dimples on the cheeks, those impish sparks in her eyes!

She fitted all the canons of a Ukrainian beauty.
Black smooth hair to the middle of her back; arches of black eyebrows on the round face; voluminous breasts; rounded shoulders smoothly passing into the hands put akimbo on her big and bold hips over the luxurious thighs of a trained swimmer.
Because she was going in for that sport.

And, with all that, what did she need me for?
And again a simple answer – she was going to marry in summer.
Not me, of course, but some lieutenant graduating some military school who after the wedding would take her to the place of his service.

There was not much time left and we did not want to lose it.
We loved to love each other and wanted it more and more.
But that came later, at first we had to bust her cherry.

The first two meetings we spent in the washroom compartment with one window and one sink partitioned for, some reason, from the rest of sinks and taps. 
So the compartment was furnished in a truly spartan style but for the initial stages of recognizing each other served well especially since the latch-lacking door of it opened inside. 

And then the guys from Room 71 left for a day or two leaving their key to Zhora Ilchenko.
Actually, Zhora rented something in the city but who would refuse the key from a free room in the Hosty?

They did not pass the key to him from hand to hand though but hung it on the shield with keys behind the watchwoman's desk in the lobby. 
I do not know how all that information reached me, but I did not wait for another invitation to such a gift of fate and snatched the key earlier than Zhora.
In the evening, Nadya and I retired to Room 71 and locked the door.

When the knocking on the door ceased and the echoes of Zhora’s cries, ‘Anyone seen Ogoltsoff?!', died away in the corridor outside, Nadya started to gradually take off items of her sportswear accompanying the striptease of the stagnation era with a chant from the pre-war movie ‘The Circus', 

‘Tiki-tiki-do, ay!
I’m leaving from the cannon to the sky!’

Although she obviously was a little nervous.

We lay down on the bed by the window.
On the other side of the double partition made of gypsum slabs was my room, 72.
There, by the window stood Fyodor's bed under the wall socket which was not properly fixed in its place and kept falling out. 

Nadya’s scream from the socket attracted Fyodor’s attention.
He took it out altogether and till late at night was listening to the following moans.
We were not aware of being tapped but even knowing it would not stop us.

The next day the guys from Room 71 returned and wanted the key back...

On Monday dating in the washroom, Nadya was sad and silent, but I managed to elicit the reason. 
Marc Novoselitsky was spreading a dirty rumor among the four-year students that Ogoltsoff had had Shvycha in the washroom from the back…
I always felt he was not indifferent to her.
Otherwise, why should he be so attentive to zipper slider movements at that birthday?
Well, I’ll let you have it now, Jewish bastard!

On Tuesday he went to the shower and coming back with wet hair and a towel over his shoulder he found only me in the room. 
I locked the door and said,
‘Take off your glasses, Marc. I’ll beat you up.’
He did not remove the glasses but started running around the brown table with chairs pushed under it.
I had to move the table to the cabinet-box so that there remained no space for him to go on with orbiting it. 
In the gap between the window sill, the bed, and the table he stood with his head bowed like Andriy, the son of Taras Bulba – a lamb resigned himself to being sacrificed.
I hit him on the chin so as not to damage the glasses and promised on high tones that if he, the motherfucker, would squeal a single word of Shvycha…
When I finished my Sermon on the Mount he set his glasses aright and said with an ingratiating smile:
‘You’ve fucking well fucked the fucking shit from fucking me, right?’

(...the wisdom of ages imbibed with the mother’s milk.
And—what is characteristic—he on the fly picked up the expressions from my sermon.
Ability to languages is in their blood…)

On Thursday, at the end of dating in the washroom, she said thoughtfully, 
‘Yet he was right after all...’
I was stunned that I, like, was fulfilling the plans laid down by Marc Novoselytsky.
Some fucking Nathan the Prophet…
But where was the way out?

The manna from heaven came in the form of a first-year student of muzped.
In his angel-like curls and the golden shine of his glasses rim, he descended from above—the firmament of the fifth floor—to our sinful third floor and handed me the key to a vacant room in the corridor of theirs.
Hallelujah!
But why?
After all, I did not ask him or anyone else and I did not even suspect the existence of that room. 
How could he possibly know?! 
Yes, I gave him the guitar a couple of times in the autumn, but since then we had not even met. 

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my…
- WOULD YOU FUCKING SHUT UP IN YOUR FUCKING SLEEPING BAG?!.) 

And that was it.
Having the key, Nadya and I switched to the nocturnal way of life, rising to the fifth floor when the evening life subsided in the corridors of the student hostel and going down to the third in the quietude of the dawn-dusk. 

She became, like, a freshman.
When our course was taken to Kiev to have an excursion, for the sake of training, in a bus for foreign tourists, she also joined. 
The young guide in that bus spoke only English.
‘Look to your left… Look to your right...’
At the end of the tour, he asked if we had any questions. 
I was so involved in the role of a foreign tourist that asked in English too:
‘Are you a Communist, Mr. Guide?’
Taken aback by such an unexpected question from Nezhin, he still managed to answer:
‘I am a Candidate for the Communist Party Membership.’
'Okay, I see Comrade Guide.’

Then Nadya and I sat on a bench in a green patch of one of the steep lanes descending to the Khreshchatyk Street.
The sun was shining with fluffy clouds floating around but not screening it.
Nadya and I kissed long kisses.
Next to me sat Igor Recoon and sadly threw bits of cookies to the pigeons of different feather noisily crowding on the asphalt at our feet.
Hopefully, Kiev felt on that day that it was—albeit small—but Paris as well…

(...why was it tormenting to be a secsot?
I did not tell on anybody, the KGBist kept shaking his head at my reports empty of information.
Still, the feeling of being hooked and squeezed with the ratchet from which there was no way out, and the constant fear that my finking would get known remained the source of inescapable internal torment – an unwilling rat was still a rat. 
On the other hand, I felt somewhat guilty before the captain.
Especially after I turned down his request in winter…)

The captain asked to sell him my sheepskin coat so that he would go hunting in it. 
The short coat of shaggy sheepskin, my father’s coat still from the Object.
The sheepskin on which I sat with Olga at our wedding party.
It was a part of my image, together with the black plastic ‘diplomat’ and my half-tabooed response to any life problem:
‘Flick the fear! We’ll prick through the freaky hooey!’
To sell that sheepskin coat was like selling a part of oneself.
I did not tell the captain all of that, I only answered that I couldn’t.
He didn’t insist, though.
That might have been a test of my willingness to sell myself.

But in May I pleased him in full.
He was rewarded for all those empty reports written under his dictation that nothing worthy of attention happened or heard about.
He had been dictating for me to write them and the sheets of paper with my handwriting and the signature ‘Pavel’ accumulated in his safe and I was getting hooked deeper and deeper...

In May, returning from the weekend, Marc entered the room bubbling with delight from a new game he learned in Kiev.
It’s called ‘The Game of Parties’ and we all should have a try and see how interesting it was.
Fyodor and I took a break in the game of ‘fool’ played on the cover of his bed.
Ostrolootsky sat down on his and leaned the back of his head against the wallpaper with the accountancy figures of card debts written on it and we all listened to the rules.

The idea is to re-make the history process.
We start from the very beginning, from the summer of 1917 when there was not the one-party political system, but all sorts of Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, Social-Revolutionaries, Anarchists and so on. 
Each player chooses a party to their liking and tries to convince the other players that his party is the best. 
Try and you'll see what a great fun it is!

Our Room 72 was no less popular than a public toilet by a cheap beer bar and everyone who dropped in was met with Marc's happy laugh and the offer to partake in so breath-taking role-playing game. 
He himself, Ilya Lipes and Ostrolootsky, for a starter, called themselves the Bund, on the basis of their shared nationality, but then split over to the Mensheviks and the Social Democrats.

Passing through the room, Sasha Nesteryouk gayly waved his black scarf and proclaimed anarchy to be the mother of order.
Fyodor and I declared ourselves fighters from the Peasant Army of Nestor Makhno and threatened to fuck up anyone who interfered with our playing 'throw-in fool'.

Yasha, a resident of Poltava, became a representative of the Ukrainian Central Rada.
The horseplay was not very long but as loud as usual...

The next morning no one recollected the noisy pastime and would forget it forever if I had not been foolish enough to mention the jolly game at the meeting with the KGB man. 
The captain alertly sat upright and instead of usual two lines squeezed out of me a whole page with the names who visited the room and which party was playing for.
He did not like the conclusion of my report that the game had died out because of we got bored with it.
I had to re-write the page after he edited it.

And the hell of a rumpus broke loose. 
The KGB started to call the guy from English Department for interrogations, even those who hadn’t pop up in Room 72 that cursed evening.
They wrote down their testimonies – who entered second? who sat where? why declared himself a Kadet?
Some students were summoned more than once.
The students were coming back to the hostel with drawn faces, retelling the interrogation, anxiously discussing the possible outcome.
Under a one-party political system, you could very easily be denied a diploma even after four years of study. 

Three weeks later there was a general meeting of the English Department because the Organs discovered unhealthy tendencies among our students.
The KGB captain read out the list of the participants in the unhealthy Game of Parties.
It eased me up a little when I heard my own name – they wouldn’t guess that it was I who finked on guys.
Then they began to selectively call the players to the large board in the auditorium.

Lipes said that he dropped in absolutely by chance in search of a teapot, stayed for just two minutes and did not have time enough to get it what game it was at all.

Sehrguey Nesterenko from Kiev started at once to dramatically shout out the lines from a Shakespear’s play in original language,

‘Romans! Countrymen! Lend me your ears!..’

He was called to stop the balagan and go back to his place.

And Yasha Demyanko was even happy to lean on the lectern with his elbows and build up logical syllogisms in the most high-flown Ukrainian language about the unprecedented precedent at hand. 

The last, as the instigator, Marc Novoselitsky stood in front of the meeting and said he hadn’t thought well how bad that game was and promised to never play it again.

The meeting made a decision to announce a reprimand to everyone from the list of the captain and called to guard the honor of the Soviet youth.

On the way to the hostel, it seemed to me, that everybody was knowingly glancing at me and whispering behind my back. 

Sasha Ostrolootsky, to relieve the stress from interrogations in the KGB, drank a bottle of vodka without having a snack and had to throw up but he managed to run out to the toilet.

Everyone finished the studies and received their diplomas.
They failed to bloat the Game of Parties up to the scale of ‘poisoner-doctors case' who attempted the assassination of the Leader of All Nations, Comrade Stalin, with their medical treatment. 
 However, the KGB captain had proved to his seniors that he was getting his salary not for nothing. 

(...and I am still thinking that it was not for nothing when Gray came to the stoker-hose to give me a bashing for finking on guys. 
He only anticipated the events and came ahead of time…)

The first time that I had that thought was at the farewell meeting with the captain in that academic year.
He gave me twenty rubles and took a receipt that I received the money for the secret collaboration.

Oh, yeah! The sum doesn’t match and it was not silver coins, but the money burnt my hands and I wanted to quickly arrive in Konotop and immediately exchange all twenty rubles for grass.

But I failed to regain the peace of mind.
I rode on the footstep of Tram 3, looking at my reflection in the glass of folded door (I always liked my reflection in it) but now I hated this face. 
Why did I ruin my own life?

Between the New Building and the Hosty, there was a rather wide ditch for draining of excess water from the lake in the Count's Park into the Oster. 
We walked together—Nadya, I and Igor Recoon—for some reason bypassing the New Building from the other side when I noticed an iron pipe from one bank of the ditch to the other.
It sagged about a meter from the still water overgrown with duckweed.
‘I dare me to go over!’ said I.
Nadya screamed:
‘No! Don’t dare!’
And Igor immediately said:
“I bet you won’t!’

The pipe was not wide—the cross section of 10 cm—and above the middle of the ditch it started swaying under my feet.
With Nadya's ‘ah!' and ‘oh!' behind me I still caught my balance, advanced another two meters and ran the rest of the way. 
‘Aha!’ shouted I and looked around.
Igor waved me from the other bank:
‘I dare you to come back!’
Look for a fool in some other place! I’m Ogoltsoff but not that much.

Why had I started all that at all? 
The darn masculine pride.
The day before our course had a picnic on the Oster bank, almost outside the city.
There Nadya challenged me to compete in swimming.
One hundred meters along the river.
She immediately went ahead and after twenty meters I realized that my Kandybin-made freestyle swimming was garbage to her powerful butterfly.
What could I do?
I climbed on the bank and was the first to reach the finish line.
I met the winner with a bunch of flowers grabbed in the grass along the way:
'You're the champion, Nadya!' 
 
When the three of us (Fyodor, Yasha and I) came with a load of bottles under the canopy of giant elms in the Count's Park and lay down in the grass to have a drink accompanied with the rustle of green foliage overhead, Yasha asked if I really had chosen the career of a circus pipe walker. 
I was surprised because he had not been there, but Fyodor said that the whole English Department already knew about my crossing the ditch.

We drank and Fyodor began to complain about the pro-rector Budowski who had viciously spoiled Fyodor's entire Grade Book where they registered the results of credits and examination. 
All the grades in his were uniform ‘threes’ but the bitch of Bodowski put him ‘four’ not heeding Fyodor's plead not to do it.
In this regard, Yasha put his index finger upright and draw a philosophical conclusion, that Fyodor ‘was swimming, and swimming, and swimming before he drowned nearby the shore’.

We drank again and, inspired by the bright warm day, I said that pipe-walking was a baby toy because of I could climb even that elm.
Its wide, unembraceable trunk forked about eight meters above the ground. 
Yasha again instructively lifted his philosophical finger and declared that no humanly possible and he was prepared to buy two bottles of wine if I waved my hand from the foliage of its crown.

It was a flimflam on my part because behind the elm there grew a thin tree from where you could move over into the fork of the giant. 
I climbed to the agreed altitude and safely returned to the native terra firma.
Yasha began to argue it was a swindle, but Fyodor, as an arbitrator, told him to shut up – the point stipulated had been reached and Yasha owed two bottles on the barrelhead.

When we finished and went to the Hosty I showed them the pipe over the ditch – a training kit for pipe-walking.
Yasha flew into zeal and announced such crossing a trifle and he would easily prove it for mere two bottles of wine.
If I would hold his pants.
I could not refuse a senior student from the same department, my coach at playing Preferans and Protracted Throw-in Fool.

And he stepped on the pipe and walked ahead in his elegant white shirt of crossed yellow and blue stripes from under which lasted his long legs in socks and black shoes. 
He did not know how insidious the pipe was over the middle of the ditch.
However, it turned out not too deep.

When he got back to us the colors of the shirt clinging to his torso had additions of slimy green.
He had nothing to lose anymore and went for the second time with the same success, though.
My laughter ignited Fyodor and to maintain the honor of the fourth course he gave me his pants also and went over the shaky piece of iron.
After splashing down he was smart enough to get out at the opposite bank of the ditch.

Damn it! I was splitting my sides with their pants in my hands.
They might have done it, by the by, would they not surrender beforehand taking their pants off.
Well, at least the Hosty was not too far off and four-year students without their pants were not a too rare sight there. 

But the hoot, it seems, was ominous.
Arriving home in Konotop I found out that Olga was missing.
She went to work the day before and hadn't been seen since. 
My mother visited Olga’s aunt but she didn’t know anything either.

At the insistent urging of my mother, I dined before going to aunt Nina in the hope of more recent news. 
She shook her head sadly, nothing,
Then I went to the brick factory.

It was already dark and electric bulbs shed their yellow light inside of the main workshop floor building.
Konotop brick factory, as it turned out, didn't use a circle kiln being equipped with trolley-trains over narrow gauge rail tracks.

It seemed to be a break and on the whole workshop floor, I saw just one man.
I asked where Olga was.
‘Where should she be?’ retorted he angrily. ‘Whoring out in the city.’
Then I recognized him, it was the one she had acquainted me with by Store 1. 
Had he recognized me?
I don’t know.

I went from the workshop floor into the night. 
Whoring out...
But, maybe, she’d come to the third shift?
I had nowhere to go anyway.

Not far from the workshop I climbed upon the wall of an unfinished building and sat there like that owl that flew to me in my childhood at the Object sent by the unknown. 

That's how I sat there, in the middle of the night, thinking thoughts which are better be left alone and not thought at all and if they somehow got started, you'd better drop them and not think all the way down their consequential line to the very end which would do no good because there comes the moment when their critical mass goes beyond the fail-safe point and—whether you want it or not—you have already to act regardless of how well they have been thought through on the way or else… 
But acting what?

A rectangle of yellow light got opened in the darkness, a man came out of the workshop door and slammed the light back in the dark.
He opened it again, went in, and all again was dark.
Been out to take a leak.
Nothing to do here.
I’m going home.

The next day brought news.
Sasha Plaksin, aka Esa, from Gogol Street, had seen Olga near the huts by the Seim river. 
He did not speak to her but saw there for two days in a row.

I did not wait for further developments.
The main thing she was alive and kicking and I had an examination next morning.

Lupus evaluated my proficiency in Latin with ‘four’.
By the door to the auditorium where he held the examination of our course, I roared at the top of my lungs:

‘Guaudeamus igitur!..’

The disappearance of my wife followed by her popping up in absentia at a place I wouldn't like her to be was putting me off but when started it could but go on: 

‘Juvenes dum sumus!..’

Lupus jumped out of the door to make sure it was I who loved his Latin so loudly and later, when I sat down in front of him at the examination desk he acted as a skilled worker at a conveyor belt – opened my grade book, put ‘four’, closed it, handed to me.
Farewell, Latin.

After the exam, I returned to Konotop and my mother told me that Olga came in the morning.
Not knowing that her mother-in-law was in the bedroom she immediately rushed to the mirror of the wardrobe in the living room.
She unbuttoned her shirt to examine the hickeys on her chest.

Brand of the owner.
Everybody gets their kind of it.
For someone, it's hieroglyphs on the wrist.
Another one's adorned with a necklace of monkey bites on their breasts. 

‘I yelled at her. Told her to go to where she was.
She gathered her clothes and left.
What will be now?’
I shrugged,
‘What can there be?’
‘No way for her to get Lenochka,’ my mother said.
All that was very painful.

Olga came next morning, but already in a turtleneck.
She said she was staying with aunt Nina because my mother kicked her out.
Then she poured a pack of lies about resting by the Seim with Sveta in the hut of uncle Kolya’s friends.
I asked her not to strain herself, we were going to divorce.
‘And Lenochka?’
‘She’ll stay here.’
Olga began to threaten that she would take her daughter to her mother in Theodosia.
Then she said that I had made her do it with all my whores in Nezhin. 
She had been being told everything but just kept silent.
And, yes, she went to the Seim out of spite, but there was nothing there, and we could still get things right.

(...in life, there is always a choice. 
You can dig a hole or you can not dig it.
Having submitted for divorce, you admit being a cuckold who takes retaliatory measures within the frame of a current public moral.
Without filing for divorce you still remain a cuckold but only if you look at yourself through the eyes of society or—but not everyone is up to that ‘or’—you become a hooey-pricker who does not care a fuck and lives for their own pleasure.

The small nuance is that that the true hooey-pricker does not notice any dilemma – they just live for their pleasure all the time. 

I always had it good with Olga but a whole lot of centuries-old morals and codes of ‘honor’ heaped on me and I was pressed to making a choice: to become a cuckold or go to the other league?

Making a choice is always a tragedy – choosing one thing you lose the alternative…) 

I never liked to choose, I preferred leaving tragedies to others – to the fate, or the chance.
At that moment I used Olga as a tossed coin.
I told her that everything would be effaced and forgotten if she had got me grass for a joint by the end of the day.
She left and came back by the evening, weary and tired.
She said she had walked the whole city but no one had any grass.
The finger of fate.
A cruel chance.

Alea jacta est!. 

(were Olga to get the joint, I, as a noble man, would only have to keep my word. 
We would have to start living on and now this letter would have been written to you by someone else. 
And maybe no letter would be needed, but you would have a dad and mom.
After all, changing just one, even a tiny detail harbors innumerable options for possible consequences.

If you, say, flick in a time machine to the Mesozoic era, where you accidentally slap-kill one single mosquito then, returning back, you find yourself in an irreversibly changed future – yes, the same year when you had left, but you yourself do not correspond to the contemporary standards. 
And no one to blame, you should have watched out better in what you were stepping in that Mesozoic past.

Just a single joint would return to me the family idyll with the ideal woman.
She was not trading herself for money or some benefits, and she cheated on me just for her personal pleasure.
A most natural exchange of joys – you to me, and I to you.
The fact that she was exchanging with someone else did not take off from my having it good with her.
Why did I so foolishly discarded that what I wanted and was getting?
The moral foundations of the society left me no other choice but to join the crowd of dirty stupid ‘seminarists’…)

She made me an excellent blowjob for goodbye and asked to come to the aunt Nina's next day for something important. 
So, by the will of the cruel chance, I became a cuckold.

(...for a long time I couldn’t understand why I never liked Lermontov, but now I know that’s because of his lies.
Lermontov lied from the very beginning, from his poem to Pushkin’s death:

‘...with the lead of a bullet in his chest, he drooped his head...' 

Well, let’s say this lie was caused by the ignorance of anatomy.
A hussar is not a doctor after all, and for him, the groin, where, actually hit the bullet, and the chest is all the same. 
Half a meter higher, half a meter lower, what the hell difference?!

But the following lie I really cannot forgive:

‘...he rebelled against the society’s morals...’

Pah! Stop kidding, Lermontov-boy.
He did not rebel, on the contrary, he had exactly fulfilled the precepts of the society for such a case.
With the utmost rigor and slavish loyalty, Pushkin followed the rules. 

And since he himself did not dare disobey the moral charter of the society then what can we, mere mortals, do in case of violation of marital fidelity but to file for divorce?

One always looks for some excuses to justify their beloved.

What if Pushkin did not obey the dictates of customs and morals?
What if he intentionally used them for his personal gains?
What if the aging weary poet, worn out with the excesses of poetical lifestyle, challenged a greenhorn French youth on a visit to Russia for too close attention to his wife and feigned a Shakespearean Othello with the hidden agenda to get killed at the ensuing duel and pass away in style?

However, the development of this hypothesis requires three doctoral degrees: that in gerontology, in psychology, and in philology.
And I have a more important matter on my hands – the letter to my daughter, so we’ll flashback, from Varanda to Konotop...)

The next day at the aunt Nina’s hutta, she and her aunt performed in duo what I had already heard from Olga about a fresh start from the clean leaf.
Then her aunt went to her work on the second shift.
Olga and I drank a glass of moonshine each and for about an hour were killing each other all over the kitchen and the living room.

When we got dressed Olga asked – what now?
I replied that the question had been answered and, alas, not by me.
She cried and said that she knew what to do now and started swallowing some pills.
I managed to take away a pair of then but there had been more than that.

I rushed out of the hutta, ran along Budyonny Street and past the Plant Park to the Bazaar where a telephone booth hung at the intersection.
Its receiver luckily was nor torn away and it worked.
I called an ambulance.
Probably, it's not every day they were called for a suicide attempt but the ambulance car had overtaken me on the way back. 

In the aunt Nina's hutta, Olga sat limply on a stool in the middle of the kitchen and gave reluctant answers to the doctor and nurse in white coats. 
She had a large mug in her hands and on the floor by her feet was a basin where to she had done the stomach lavage.

The crisis was obviously over and I left without going into details. 
It was unlikely that she would take another try and from my own experience, I knew that gastric lavage brings about reassessment of values and considering things from a different perspective. 

Two days later I was told that they had seen Olga boarding a Moscow train with some kind of a black-haired guy.
Most likely, that was the one she’d been cheating on with my participation two days before...

At the end of the month, I went to Nezhin to the fourth-course graduation party as I promised Nadya. 

The party was arranged in the hall of celebrations on the first floor of the Canteen.
Nadya was the most beautiful, in a long dress made of light chiffons, like a bride at her wedding, only pink. 

In the end, everyone went to the Oster bank behind the hostel to build a fire from the thick copybooks with lecture notes scribbled through all the four years. 
Fyodor and Yasha did not add their share to the fire, because of I had never seen anything like a copybook near them and their absence at the party as well.

The full moon was shining, the bonfire kept devouring with its tongues of the nationalistically yellow-and-blue flame the pages of once so necessary notes.
The former students stood looking at the fire—from now on each for themselves—and in the dark tall grass around the teacher of theoretical grammar wandered in circles.
He was a dwarf, about up to your waist in height, but they said he was very clever.
One of the graduates, the ugliest of all and, as gossip had it, dull and rude, agreed to marry him so as not to go to a village to work off for her diploma.
She herself was also a villager so she knew what she was losing by making such a choice.

For our farewell wedding night with Nadya, we went up to her room where there were even curtains on the window.
We had goodbyes, and slept a little, and woke up for new goodbyes in breaststroke, and dog paddle, and backstroke, and front crawl and freestyle…

When the pale morning light began sipping through the curtains and she reached for the first blowjob in her life I wearily pulled back.
Let her future husband be first at least at something. 
All of us—the cuckoldry brethren—have to be generous to each other...

When a mujik has nothing to do he finds hard labor for himself.
The hutta at the Decemberists 13 amply provided an inexhaustible source of what to fill your leisure time with and my father harnessed me into the infrastructure reconstruction...

Brick paneling the earth cellar under the kitchen, replacing the fence and the wicket, constructing a summer shower next to the shed, insulating the outhouse in the garden, laying the brick paths so that not to knead the mud with feet after the rain.
Summer always brims up with tasks.

For breaks, I visited Lyalka. 
He lived by the Peace Square on the second floor in one of red brick five-story blocks between the Peace movie theater and Department Store.
In the one above the ice-cream pavilion ‘Snowflake’.
His father, in his youth, was a criminal and on reaching the venerable age became an ideological inspirer of the following generations of criminals. 
Returning from the zone they shared warm recollections about Lyalka's dad coming to the court in a jacket over a tank shirt with instructions to keep their tail up when in the zone, bandied words with the judge and was forcibly escorted out. 
I was too late to meet him.
But his mother-in-law, Lyalka’s grandma, was still living like a hermit in the bedroom with a view of the pitch-mounted roofing felt on the ‘Snowflake’s’ roof.
She shared the room with the decrepit but malicious lap-dog Bayba and Lyalka’s mom.

Lyalka replaced his dad in the line of moral support to guys departing to the zone.
He did not attend the court sittings but he knew when the guys were sent to the place of serving their time and came to the station to say goodbye through the bars of a special car, aka ‘stolypin'. 

The balcony in Lyalka’s flat went from the living room into a wide quiet courtyard between the five-story buildings with occasional shady apple trees and a hutta locked up with criss-cross nailed boards – the incubator for growing criminals.
In the dovecot above the hutta, Lyalka’s younger brother Slave, aka Rabentus, held pigeons when not in the zone.
Their mother, Maria Antonovna, a dressmaker from the atelier behind the Main Post-Office, once dreamed of Lyalka becoming a violinist and even had bought him a violin, which he stacked away in the nailed up hutta when like going to a lesson.
So, for all her pains, she had only managed to leave him with the inbred love for good clothes.
Lyalka's shirts and jeans and shoes were always tiptops. 

But he also loved music unlike Rabentus whose interests were limited to his pigeons and havvage, that's why he was twice as thick as slender Lyalka. 
On that balcony, we listened to Czeslav Neman, Slade, AC/DC… 

When the doorbell was starting to buzz, Lyalka would go to the hallway and lead the visitor to the kitchen to sell them some jeans or a shirt with foreign stickers. 
If it turned out to be not a client but some of his brother's bros, or simply a guy from the city rowdies, like Count-Junior, or Horse, who just was dragging through the yard and dropped in attracted by the sound of the loudspeakers (Lyalka's hutta enjoyed a dynastic respect) to share his notions that everything should be just and by justice. 
Then Lyalka put a record of over-hard rock – the Arrow Smith or the Black Sabbath.
Those home-made natural philosophers of justice concepts could not withstand more than one number and left the sofa under a hard carpet cover with a sudden recollection of some urgent business awaiting them in the city. 
Lyalka closed the door after them, sighed and rolling his eyes under the forehead shook his head – oh, those boars! but the traditions oblige.
Then he stroke his a la cardinal beard and put on records of Engelbert Humperdink.

In fact, he had a craving for knowledge and was not shy to show it.
One day he did not hesitate to ask me about the meaning of ‘excess' word after hearing it from me. 
In short, he needed me as an oasis among all those champions for justice.
No doubt, grass was the main thing to connect us and in the period between the seasons, all kind of pills – noxiron, seduxen, kadein, one only had to know what should be mixed with what and in which proportion. 

He was meeting with his girlfriend Valentina at the dance-floor in the Loony.
She had beautiful Spanish eyes, as one of the boars put it in the form of a compliment:
‘I'd pick such eyes up on the wall.' 

One evening I danced with her girlfriend Vera Yatsenko though I knew that Quak was pining after her for years.
She was walking out with him for a week and then did not want to recognize him for months.

After the dances, Quak stopped me and her in the park alley.
He asked Vera for an apology and permission to have a talk with me.
She went on in a leisurely crowd flowing to the exit from the night Loony park.
Quak and I stepped aside to the trimmed bushes so as not to be in the way of the current.
I could see that Quak was drunk, not quite blind but well loaded.

He leaned his forehead against my shoulder and looking at the ground said:
‘Sehrguey, I’ve been with Olga.’
Of course, that frank confession scraped me, but I avoided explaining the fallacy of such a perspective – that it was not he who was with her, but she who was with him, and that he was not the only one she used.
First of all, he wouldn't get such subtleties even when sober, to leave alone his current state, and secondly, I needed to catch up with Vera Yatsenko. 

I escorted her to one of the two-story houses along the Peace Avenue and, when we were standing in the dark courtyard, Quak popped up in the gate and revved forward with inappropriate exclamations.
I took a couple of steps to meet him and hit in the head.
He fell down and shouted,
‘So, that’s how you meet?! Got prepared?!’

Probably, the drunk really have their guardian angel, but with that preventive blow I dislocated one of my fingers and couldn’t box anymore.
When Quak rose to his feet the fight went into a wrestling single combat.
We reeled over the ground and after the threat from Vera Yatsenko that she would call her brother and father, we left the yard.

Walking in the same direction, we gradually restored being on speaking terms, touched on the details of the recent battle and discussed the indisputable merits of Vera Yatsenko.
We did not return to the subject of Olga.

Near the Under-Overpass he boarded Tram 3 with the destination to the Settlement and I went on, bypassed the Station and proceeded along the railway tracks to Decemberists Street because my shoulder was slightly bleeding torn by the coal slag cover of the walkway in the courtyard of the two-story building.
Coal slag is good to overcome the autumn or heavy rains mud, but as tatami, it falls short of the cinder path. 

The next morning I had to tell my parents that I had fallen off a bicycle – a traditional excuse which causes an understanding smirk on the inquirer. 

(...probably, the guardian angels are also retiring from their duty.
Many years later Quak died the traditional Ukrainian mujik’s death – fell asleep in a snowdrift and froze a few meters from his hutta.
Sometimes it seems to me that the only place where he still exists is my memories of him…)

Soon I was summoned to the militia station near Store 5 to explain my role in Olga's suicide attempt of which they were informed by the ambulance workers. 
I assured that I was not an accomplice and they let me go.

My mother collected Olga's clothes and shoes that remained in the hutta: light and warm – for all seasons. 
It turned out a hefty bale, which she lined with a white cloth for sending by the railway post cars.
I asked Vladya for help and we dragged that bale along the tracks to the station luggage office.
We tied it with a rope to a nickel plated pipe from a window shaft.
The way like prehistoric hunters or Aborigine savages carry killed game home.
Only we carried in the opposite direction – away, for it was not prey, but a loss. 

In the office, I wrote the Theodosia address on the cloth and got the receipt indicating the weight. 

When we got out of there Vladya obviously wanted to tell me something, but he restrained himself. 
I always knew that he was more tactful than Quak.

There are thoughts that are better not to be started…

The curtain shaft bent under the load we’d been dragging and I threw it into the bushes behind the high first platform of the station not to carry it along with me to Lyalka...

On September 1, at lining-up around the big pensive bust of Gogol between Old and the New Buildings, the rector of the Institute, as always, announced that the classes were starting for all except the second and third-year students, who would go for a month to villages with patronizing help.
The second and third-year students of all the Departments, as always, shouted ‘Hurray!’

The next morning a pair of big buses took the sophomores along the Moscow highway to the district center of Borzna and from there along a bumpy road to the Bolshevik village, but the final kilometer turned unpassable because of the too deep mud.
The students and half a dozen of overseer teachers get out of the buses onto the roadside and walked along a narrow path trodden through the green thicket of the rain-soaked corn stalks to the village where they had to patronize in hop harvesting. 

Many of them dragged ‘torbas’, cloth bags filled with provision taken from their homes.
My burden was lighter – the guitar with its neck across my shoulder and cigarettes in my pocket so the walk would be a buzz but for my sneakers getting wet through.
In front of me a red sweater, blue jeans and black rubber boots plus a white kerchief-visor on top of all were dragging their ‘torba’.

I am often amazed at my own myself – whenever I meet an object with the hair longer than mine, the hips wider and rounder, I get taken in completely. 
I am routed, conquered, amazed, sticking my paws up and ready to surrender and plead for the winner's mercy.

‘Hey, girl, your boots are size 45?’
A haughty look over her shoulder,
‘46.’
Like the ‘hello’ so is the answer.
A poor try at hooking, but at least I was not cut dead.
Overtaking her I looked back to smile at the inexorably disgruntled face and went on.
I had not the habit of winking to girls also, reportedly, they like it. 

The Bolshevik village was one wide empty street of half a dozen huttas and some larger buildings standing apart in the fog and dank dampness behind the trees that still dropped rare heavy drops from their foliage.
Everyone went into one-story canteen murky and dark because of the bad weather outside narrow windows.
Long tables under the worn-out oilcloth and the plywood shutter of the locked dispensing window witnessed the purpose of the room.
After protracted negotiations between the overseer teachers and local authorities, the students began to be accommodated for staying in the village. 

A pair of wooden two-story buildings with four-person rooms were provided for student girls and the guys were given the large hall on the second floor of the club wooden as well.
Each student got a mattress with a pillow, an army blanket and a pair of sheets.
Taking this bundle to the club, I was amazed at the simplicity of design of the ad hoc dormitory.
The low decking of board shields made a too familiar view to me.
Like, spending a month in an overcrowded clink of the guards' house. 
Some thirty mattresses were spread on top of the decking, side by side, so for stretching out one had to crawl along onto his mattress on all fours. 

Fortunately, near the door, there remained a tall billiard table covered with a worn green cloth.
Choosing it for my bed I did not pretend a thief-master but simply noticed that each and every of the billiard balls in the rack on the wall was severely impaired making the whole set a collection of half-eaten apples.
No sane stretch of the imagination would suppose any possibility of playing the game which rendered the table just an item of the scenery. 
That were the grounds for my sleeping four meters away from the common decking, half a meter higher than I was used to, yet without neighbors snoring into my ears.
The table width allowed for a piece of a broken lacquered cue to be placed next to the mattress because of the gloomy rumors circulating among the student guys about the ill-will moods towards us expressly harbored by the local youth.

We were fed at the canteen three times a day.
The students 'eeked' and 'ughed' but I could sympathize with them, it was as havvable havvage as anywhere else. 

The next morning we went to harvest the hops.
It grew in rows of three-meter stems that reached the wires stretched over the field. 
The tightly wreathed dark green leaved stems had to be pulled down to the ground for picking off the clusters of soft pale-green cones.
When the collected cones filled up a shallow wicker basket with two handles, it was dumped into a box on the scales.
The overseer teacher wrote down the kilos you’ve brought in their notebook for later calculation of your payment after deductions for food and bed.
But the price per kilo of harvested crops was so insignificant that simple arithmetic counting nipped in the bud all labor enthusiasm…

Of course, there still remained strong incentives of the sonorous yells and calls of fervent young voices over the field and so diverse but equally attractive (each in its own way) forms of female students. 
However, my fingers, accustomed to grabbing a breaker and strumming the strings, flatly refused to partake in that Chinese-peasant-like assiduous labor.
My first day of work on the plantation of hops was also the last.

In the future, I did various jobs: I went to the district town of Borzna a couple of times to load provision for the canteen, and I mended flooring on a cow farm with the scraps of planks, and I sawed wood for a local woman in exchange for blurry strong moonshine, and I.. and.. well, perhaps, that’s all but, in general, not a little after all.

The hop-harvesters had earned some forty rubles for that month.
A couple of students working at the dryer got about hundred, and I, for all my patronizing efforts, was given twelve rubles and some kopecks at the institute cash desk.
Most likely, it was earned in that three days on the farm where I sawed and nailed boards bridging the dung over.

Once, in response to a strong hammer blow, liquid dung jetted through a gap in between the uneven planks right into my face. 
The cow standing in the nearest stall turned to me her left eye and grinned with such satisfaction that now I know for certain that those cattle are not as stupid as they pretend to be. 

Though, the main occupation on the farm was playing 'throw-in fool' with three local mujiks.
My photographic deck of cards plunged them into a catatonic stupor, they gazed and gazed and gazed at the dealt hands and it took too long for them to throw a card in, they obviously did not want to part with any of the nude girlies. 

(...now the era has changed and the same cards, but in color, are sold at stalls in the railway stations...)

One of the students who worked at the dryer, redheaded Grisha from the biofac also played 'throw-in fool' with me after his work.
He really was keen on winning.
The hot-tempered guy even found a deck of ordinary cards to replace my black-and-white gallery, but the school of Yasha Demyanko was bringing its fruits and by the end of the month he had lost to me a twenty-five-bottle box of vodka.
However, mindful of Sasha Ostrolootsky’s orphanage wisdom, that a bird in the hand is better than a pie tomorrow studded with rubies from the sky, I on the last day told the fiery-cheerful Grisha that one bottle immediately would write off all his debt and he happily ran to the village store, otherwise I wouldn’t get even as much.

It's not that I was really buzzed with vodka or moonshine, no, I simply was pushed to them by my social position and the opinion of the society about me. 

(...we are prisoners of opinion about us. 
If they will tell me that someone became a drunkard because of that 'noblesse oblige', I am prepared to believe it…) 

For example, a male student from the philfac with a couple of his group-mate girls wandered to the farm.
They lingered by the stall of the bull tied with an iron chain.
The guy threw to the beast a scrap of hay taken from the cow in a nearby stall.
Smelling the cow’s scent in the delivered hay, the bull got raised and kicked up mad bellowing and pulling at his chain.

I accidentally passed by and that was enough.
In the evening oral news bulletin at the canteen, they were relishing the news about Ogoltsoff taking philfac girls on the excursion around the bull's dick. 

Personal image is a terrible force and you will never prove to anyone that with my tremulous attitude towards girls I do not even wink at them.

Having familiarized myself with the Bolshevik work and living conditions, I went to Konotop. 
First of all, to change the sodden sneakers, and then, in Konotop I was also awaited by the pressing harvesting labors...

Back in August, Lyalka and I made a couple of regional tours around the corners of the city backstreets away from its noisy main thoroughfares.
In the quietude of the forlorn lanes, we took into account the small but magnificent plantations of cannabis gently waving to us from behind the fences with their softly outlined bushy branches under loads of ripening heads. 

He was the guide and I was a tourist admiring the diligence of Konotopers carefully cultivating their personal plots.
The time had come to help them in harvesting.

Of course, not everybody waited for my humanitarian patronizing help.
However, there still remained unharvested plots.

I was a nobble robber, acquainted with the concepts of justice, and did not take away more than two trees from one plantation.
And those two were a pretty big hell of a load to carry.

Whereto?

To the nearest nook for a too shallow, and I’d say predatory processing.
That is, the final product accounted for meager 10% of what could be obtained from the same amount of the raw material when approached with a balanced and well thought-out technology.
And the regretful factual turnout was, if I were asked, the consequence of lacking the most basic knowledge in such a fundamental field.
Elementary ignorance and nothing else.

After laborious night vigils in Konotop, I was already well prepared to plunge into the everyday work at Bolshevik. 

When on the first evening, after my coming back, I was thoughtfully tuning the guitar up – ...you leave it without a supervision and anyone would twist the tuning machine hither and thither, it's good they haven't torn the strings at all.. – two local guys came into the clink-like dormitory. 
They announced their desire to play billiards.

Out of curiosity – how could anyone play with so screwed up balls? – I rolled my mattress up and put it on a chair under the wall.

Well, yes, as expected no one could.
Not only that dented balls jerked and jumped on the way but it was them to chose where to jump and how.
Complete chaosity excluded any aesthetic pleasure inherent in this strictly harmonized game. 
On realizing that they introduced themselves as two brothers from a neighbor village.

The information did not arise a special excitement among the students sitting along the mattress covered decking and the brothers left. 

The following day one of them, named Stepan, called me out from the canteen at the midday meal time.
As a token of gratitude for the understanding I had shown the previous night, he invited me to have a ride to his village.
We went there on his ‘Jawa’.
Stepan pulled up in front of a well-built house and asked to pretend to his parents that I had been serving with him in the army, in the Soviet troops in Germany, and now we met accidentally.

Stepan’s parents were delighted with such a chance meeting and laid the table for the comrades in arms.
After the second glass, getting in the mood, I asked Stepan if he remembered Elsa, the German blonde waitress from the Gashtet around the corner. 
Stepan was taken aback and started to look at me more closely – what if I really had been sleeping on a bank in the next koobrik?

The next day Stepan and I went on a visit to different rooms of the girl-students on their return there after the supper.
He pulled up in a room with my course-mates, but I, realizing the complete—for me— the futility of such a hunting grounds, went on alone until reached, already on the second floor of the next hostel, the last room to the left. 
It was occupied by girls from the Philological Department: Anna, Eera, Olya, and Vera with all of whom I was so very pleased to get acquainted.
And they had no other alternative but to be pleased too without dance-floors, cinemas and even a TV set nearby.

Olya, a short amiable girl with the wavy yellow bob cut hair, asked where my business card was, meaning the guitar.
I without any problems brought it from the club, sang something sentimentally romantic and passed the guitar to Olya, who suddenly wanted to learn playing it.
Meanwhile I myself sat down onto the bed of silent Eera and started up a trifling conversation where it does not matter what is being said because of what really means is following the sounds of the voice and tracing the facial expression changes and movements of the eyes.

I do not remember if it was that, or the next evening when we went out with her from the hostel – not too far away; under the yellow light from the bulb on the lamppost between the two shabby hostels, and I had what the Indians of North America call ‘a vision'. 
I saw an endless black Ukrainian night; it surrounded us from all sides and somewhere along its edges it was already buzzing with autumn cold.
The only bright spot, beside the bulb overhead, was that face opposite, smiling and not inhospitable anymore, from which the thin frequent rays of light were beaming as it happens when you squint without closing your eyes completely. 
But I did not squint at all and, maybe, even opened my eyes wider struck with the beauty of that unknown face.

And the ‘vision’ was that I saw it all from aside—even myself—and in the center so incredibly beautiful, her face.
Like a circle of light in the darkness around us.
The lifebuoy, which will help to withstand the threatening rumble from the far horizon and whistling of icy winds.

(...I did not think all this lofty rubbish, of course, and, in fact, I was not thinking at all, I just looked at her face and fell in love more and more…) 

The next day she did not come to the canteen for the midday meal.
Vera said that Eera was on duty – cleaning the room.
The moment I came up to the dilapidated building of the hostel, she went out on the porch with a mop in her hands, in a short gown.

(...the most conventional method for estimating female beauty and attractiveness is assessing the volumes.
Experts and connoisseurs base their evaluation on the volume of the breasts and hinderlands.
Gourmets measure, subtractively, the waist…
Absolute dilettantism.
But what else to expect from all those differently aged junior bums?

The most captivating part of a woman with which she will hook you at once and forever is her knees.
If when you look at them your heart gets warm, your shoulders straighten up, your breath goes deeper, then be sure – this is it, nothing more beautiful will ever be met. 
If that does not happen, go away and be on the look-out, maybe luck will be good to you…) 

Seeing her knees I immediately realized that I was right in raising my paws and making dumb remarks about the boots size, because on the wet trail through the corn jungle under her blue jeans were those very knees.

You, of course, have guessed already, that it was your mother.

Thus, before your birth, there remained three more years. 
Such a stretch is quite sufficient for dying away of at least two loves, according to calculations of the reverend Sigmund Freud.

(...such a profanation of the dogma’s sanctity, eh? 
This silly attack is easy to parry with the trick of ‘terz’ – saying, that there are no rules without exceptions.
It depends on the rules, though.

If a certain scientist Galileo, dropping balls from the Tower of Pisa would have noticed that one of them, marked, for the exception's sake, with ‘S + E' suddenly started to soar and deliver aerobatics tricks, then there would be no law of universal gravitation. 
And on that account, our old good Ziggy cannot be considered a stubborn die-hard scientist.

He should be transferred to another league.
Put him in the rank of such illustrious coryphaei as Charles Perrault, Hans Cristian Andersen and so on, up to the nameless creators of the Thousand and One Nights. 
There he would fit perfectly with his Tom Thumb, aka ‘ego’, Evil Giant, aka ‘super-ego’, the royal castle of ‘consciousness’, and impenetrable wilds of tropical marches and jungles of ‘subconsciousness’, on the canvas of which he weaves lacy patterns of his theory.

How dare I?!
So many generations have been conceived and, in their turn, conceived further generations with the blessing and protection of his psychoanalysis!

Nature does not tolerate emptiness, man necessarily has to fill with something their gray matter, aka brain, aka the ‘highest fucking matter', using the apt expression of the marasmus-driven Battalion Commander of VSO-11. 

And that's the indisputable truth. 
Nothing but intolerance to emptiness caused the production of all those Bibles-Korans-Vedas-Iliads as well as belief in the existence of brownies. 

And, obedient to the naive wisdom of nature we stop flogging the empty bullshit—it's not pedagogically right—and went on to bring into the picture the three years until you condescend to be born…) 

In the girls' room everything was determined, that is everybody had already got it to who I was coming to. 
Olya abandoned her idea of learning to play the guitar, but I all the same never took it back to the club.
Just in case.
So that I would have an excuse to come again, like, oh, I forgot here something.
Protective measures are not redundant when your girlfriend is being told: 
‘Don’t you know, he’s married?!’

I did not deny the presence of such a fact in my biography, but that was already behind, in the abyss of the past. 
And she did not even check my passport!.

That evening a young teacher from the Philology Department came into the room.
Probably, to make sure she had checked what was going on there at all.
Because apart from me, one more lover started his visits to the room – Czech Jan.

A natural Czech, middle-aged man, who arrived within the framework of socialist integration of the fraternal states to show the Bolshevik, that was not just a village but also the hops production state farm of the same name, how to dry the hops harvested by students to get the right beer.
Czechs and beer are twin brothers.

Jan’s wife stayed to keep their children in the Czech Republic.
He missed her and, to relieve the longing, fell in love with Olya.
He began to come in the evenings, talked with her about something – I’m not sure what about because he talked in Czech.
And if it were not for the language barrier, I would ask him about the year 68. 

Once they had a party in the room, so he came even in a necktie, that’s a civilized man for you.
He brought a bottle of Champagne for the occasion and canned food, but not from the store because the canned food turned out more delicious than even the cod liver after which you had to go to Moscow or Leningrad.
And he refused to drink vodka.
Showing at the filled glass he wrinkled his face and patted himself on the heart – to say, I have incompatibility with this swill.

But when the teacher came on her supervisory visit, Jan was not present in the room.
She saw that though Eera and I were sitting on the same bed but in a quite appropriate attitude – each one at the opposite back of it. 
All moral prescriptions respected, please, get seated, let's have a cup of tea. 

And that moment in the corridor – ta-dah! 
You! Who! Mother! Bluther!
The door of the room burst wide open.
And in the dark corridor, five or six guys were looming in two ranks. 

The teacher turned around from the table,
‘What’s happening?’
‘And who are you here at all?’
She decided to suppress them with her authority. 
‘Girls! Tell them who I am!’
And all four girls, in one voice, as if in the collective recital that they had been preparing from their kindergarten times: 
‘She-Is-a-Teacher!!’
And in response:
‘And fuck her!’

Well, yes. Not all of our youth are brought up properly.
And not only in the rural areas.

During that matinee dialogue I, of course, realized that they had come after my soul.

The evening before a girl from the next hostel came running to the club dormitory with complaints that local guys were misbehaving in their room.
I, of course, ran there and saw a scene of confusion on the first floor. 
Some girl was crying, three local guys were confronted with three student guys and wrangling on the subject ‘and who are you?’
In short, a stalemate position. 

To solve the etude, I chose the bigger guy among the locals and asked the crying girl:
‘This one offended you?’
‘Yes!’
I punched the guy. 
The locals disappeared. 
The conflict solved.

Then that guy and two more with him waited for me at the entrance to the club.
‘It was not me,’ he said.
‘I’m sorry,’ said I. ‘I had no choice.’
How could I explain to him that I was trained by the Chief of Staff – a fact of violation should be followed but the fact of punishment?
Only the Chief of Staff—which is characteristic—did not ask me for forgiveness.

But, apparently, my apology was not excepted and the guys had come to show the Bolshevik style vendetta.

I fished from under the bed an empty champagne bottle and stood in front of the doorway.
They kept barking but abstained from stepping in – the bottle looked heavy.
How could they know that my martial art level was less than a fig with minus? 

Some footsteps sounded in the corridor and behind the guys I made out Stepan.
He grasped at once what was what and struck from the rear.
I also jumped out into the corridor with the battle cry:
‘Come fucking here!’
It worked no worse than on Shoorik – the guys flinched and fled.

Stepan and I were adding stimulation to them but I hadn’t the bottle in my hands.
I don’t remember where it had gone.
I remember only their united clatter down the stairs with Stepan racing after them.
I was left alone with the one who lingered upstairs but his spirit was broken and he limply slouched over the railing of the upper landing and sagged there like a wet mat.
He no longer resisted, just hang on the railing and looked down at the wooden steps where he was to plop.

And I grabbed him – noblesse oblige! – but then I heard a cry; very distant, hardly audible, like the one that called me on the snowy road near the nine-story building in Stavropol. 
I looked at the submissive jelly of a guy.
What for?
I turned around and went down the corridor back to the room.

(...I agree it's all more than strange, but strange things happen sometimes. 
Some people hear voices, but I heard calls…)

Again she did not come to the midday meal.
I went to their room.
She was sitting alone and did not want to talk.
I sat on the bed by her side, took her hand.
I liked that hand and fingers – long and tapering.
I only did not like the whitish narrow scars on the wrist, like, from an adolescent suicide attempt, but I never asked about them.
And that moment too I asked only what’s wrong.

She sobbed and said that in the morning on the plantation the senior overseer was putting her to shame.
He told it was unworthy of a teacher’s daughter to have anything in common with such a renegade and married man as I was.
And that he would call her mother and tell her everything the moment we returned to Nezhin.
But what was there to tell of?
And of which teacher mother?
‘Of Germaaaaa..’ and she burst into tears.
‘Damn them all, then! Come with me!’
‘Where?’

As if I knew where, but she agreed and we went.
At first, it was a field of corn, but not the one over which we had been walking from the buses. 
The stalks much shorter and rare.

Then the field slanted and we came at a secluded long stack of straw. 
The day was warm and clear.
We lay on the straw that broke out of the stack from one side, talking, kissing.

I wanted to open to her my whole soul; even about the fact, that I was a space cadet.
And I wanted her so badly, only the sun was in the way.
But with the approach of the evening, the solitude disappeared. 
Next to the stack there stretched a dirt road.
Some trucks and motorcycles started to pass by and stare at her red sweater.

We returned in the dark and were met by Anna waiting for us near the hostel with a warning not to go up to the room because of there was an ambush there. 
She also told the senior overseer teacher screamed and shouted in their room than both of us ignored coming to work but were seen strolling around and that the dean offices of our both department together with the rector would be informed about it. 

Olya, Vera and Jan also joined us for a decision making session: what to do?
Jan shook his head and kept repeating in Czech, which had grown more understandable already, that ‘it is-a not-a good-a’.
Olya cried out at him to better shut up and go to the canteen and bring something to eat for us. 
Because of only he could do it without evoking unwanted suspicions.
Olya and Jan understood each other without translation and he soon returned with a newspaper parcel for the hunted-after ‘milivitsi’.

I did not know that I was that hungry.
Soon there was drawn a plan for the campaign of persecuted students against oppressor-teachers.
Eera and I would go to Borzna, the native town of Vera, and stay for the night at Vera’s parents hutta.
In the morning Eera would go to Nezhin as if she had gone there two days before being unwell, and I would come back to Bolshevik as if coming from Konotop and not knowing anything whatsoever about what the fuss. 
Czech Jan saw the two of us to the road out of the village still preaching about ‘lovely pretty milovitsy’ and we left into the night.

The night was dark and windy and the road all potholes and longer than ten kilometers from the approximate estimation by Vera.
Eera got very tired, at the end, I even humped her on top of me, like Gogol's Homa Brut the witch, from one roadside post to the next. 
Eera had been already on a visit to Vera's parents’ hutta and found it even in the dead of night.

Parents of Vera bedded us on the floor in the living room and promised to wake Eera up for the seven o'clock bus to Nezhin. 
We lay down and to my embrace, Eera said that she was too tired and had to get up early. 
She was asleep at once.
And I lay awake still for a long time and silently gloated that we had rubbed the senior overseer’s nose in it.
No trumps? No ace? Grab my dick and wipe your face!

When I awoke in the morning Eera was gone and Vera's brother took me to Bolshevik on his ‘Jawa'. 
Students and teachers were just coming out of the canteen and he, cracking his motor, carried me along the crowd in the slow triumphant ride. 
 A certain stupid asshole stood with his jaw dropped.

Only Vera's brother got disappointed when I replied to him that I and Eera hadn't had it on the floor of their living room. 

She stayed in Nezhin for a long time and I again got under the influence of my image.

Three men from Borzna came to conduct a stretch of running water. 
The half inch pipe in a knee-deep trench.
I was going by and helped them a little because of nothing better to do.
They got emotional and bought some vodka, but without a snack.
A throwaway kitchen oilcloth was spread under a cherry tree, we sat on it with our feet lowered into the trench for comfort and killed the bottle. 
And then the senior overseer came up to witness a shameful fact that I again instead of work was drinking drastically and he’d let me have it as soon as we were in Nezhin.

While the youngest of the mujiks went to the store after a catch-on addition, I dropped in at the plantation. 
My course-mate girls started to speak up that I did not notice my own and keep company only with the girls from the Philology Department.
I told them I was a Slavophil since early childhood and anglofac's beef to heels did not excite me, in short – philfac forever! 

Then the mujiks called me from the trench.
We finished the extra bottle too, with a pair of doughnuts for a snack, and I passed away on the same tablecloth.
Like, enjoy our specialty dessert…

Later, the senior overseer in his accusatory speech focused on the fact, that the students on their way from the plantation had to pass by me in such a served-up form.
Although the distance between the road and the trench was about five meters, I was still ashamed to hear about it.
But that was later.

Three days after Vera went to Borzna and I accompanied her to make a telephone call to Eera in Nezhin.
‘Hi.’
‘Hi.’
‘How d’you?’
‘Nothing.’
‘You… well… come… eh? I wrote you a song.’
And what else could be expected from someone like me?

Actually, I did not write a song but made a Russian adaptation of the then-popular song ‘It's raining, it's pouring (you might be sorry)...' 

‘The weary whisper of an endless rain
Drowned hopes of seeing you again, 
Dripping drops with their low drone
make me feel forlorn and lone
and drive me mad with their stance:
‘You can be happy only once!’

What’s the use of all you weeping, rain?
Keep it back, don’t spend on me in vain
Let the wind dry up your tears
With a swarm of fallen leaves
I don’t need any preaching rains
They can’t bring back my happy days...’

Zampolit wouldn’t approve that it again was about the rain, but so was the original and the song itself had a cool harmony.

Coming back with Vera we didn’t go along the road but took a shortcut over the fields that she was familiar with.
There was some secluded hole nearby the path, like a former dugout all overgrown with the grass and we entered it for a rest. 
Vera was a beautiful black-haired girl of a dark complexion and commanding air. 
When she got fed up with my incessant babbling about Eera this, Eera that, we went on.
Getting out of the hole I noticed candy wrappers in the grass.
It seemed to be a local dating house where I failed to live up to my image.

Many years later Eera told me how one of the long evenings in Bolshevik before I got to their room, they arranged shaman dances behind the closed door. 
Vera hung a piece of sausage and a pair of onions from her sports trousers.
And she jumped in that disguise: uh! Uh!

(...those swarthy Slav females would out-sex anyone when left on their own and here lies the clue to the music of Igor Stravinsky…)

Eera arrived and I spent the night in their room.
It happened all by itself.
We lay dressed on her bed and kept hugging and pressing tighter and closer to each other, and then there was nowhere more so.
Only I did not want to creak the bed like Marc and Katranikha and it somehow…

(...Anna did not sleep and later told Eera that one moment she couldn’t control herself an kissed her own forearm…)

...but I still liked it.

Next day Eera confessed to me:
‘I seem have overcome the psychological barrier.' 
‘I kinda thought the physical too...' 

After Olya had refused to marry Jan, he instantly grew Russian. 
The pain from the unanswered love stripped him of the varnish of civilization.
He never learned the language but he stopped shaving and walked around in bristles and a black padded jacket from under which he took a bottle of vodka—at uneven intervals—and swallowed from its neck like validol or some other medication.
Homeopathy in Bolshevik style.

On the last evening before our departure from the village, Vera with a lot of care prepared a bed for me and Eera in the next room, which had already been vacated.
I did not turn off the light and Eera later told me she got appalled by the sight of what with I was getting on top of her.

In the morning, before the arrival of the buses, she hardly talked to me – ‘yes’, ‘no’, ‘nothing’.
I did not manage then to get it out of her, that it was the result of Olya's admonition that all we had had there was just a ‘collective farm affair' and back in Nezhin, I would not even look at Eera. 

When the buses came I boarded neither of them but put the guitar over my shoulder and walked towards the forest belt along the Moscow highway on the distant horizon to go hiking to Baturin and from there to Konotop.

‘They say, you’ve had an affair with a teacher’s daughter?’
‘They say, you’ve got married?’
Yes, she had and now came to Nezhin to get aright some papers and dropped into Room 72 on the third floor of the Hosty before leaving for Mongolia where they sent her husband after graduating his military school. 

By the by, he realized she was not a virgin.
After the first wedding night he asked, well, they say, that women, usually, as if were comparing… 
‘Yes, that’s true,’ she answered and didn’t add a word to it.

(...that’s how she fucking crushed the poor fool.
Just stepped on and smeared away.
Instead of comforting with a word of affection: you're my hero, dear, yes, no one's fit to hold a candle by you... 
Women are the most ruthless creatures if you ask me. 
And should we then be much surprised at having Tughriks among us?..)

However, sometimes it’s better to make love than talking.
And we lay on the former Fyodor's and now my bed because it was by the window. 
The first and only time in my life I was with a married woman.
And that’s just for the old sakes’ sake.

When we got dressed and hugged goodbye each other, she exclaimed twice:
‘I’m a whore!’
Yes, and with so happy a voice too.
Like, Archimedes in his famous jogging after a bath.
‘Eureka! I found myself and know what I’ll do in Mongolia!’’
Farewell, Nadya.
Whatever and anyway, you’re the most cloudless love of my life…

The senior overseer kept true his threats concerning me.

Again there was a general meeting of the English Department with the agenda to ask the Institute authorities to send me down.
The day before it, on Veerich’s advice, I called the meeting of my course-mates – well, of those living in the Hosty –in Room 72 to rally the ranks, so to say.

Veerich was a current four-year student who also entered the Institute after the army service.

They crowded in, were sitting on each other – all girls, except for Igor and Volodya.
I wouldn’t have supposed that such a swarm could fit in our pencil-box room.
I had to perch on the window sill.
It was some rally of supporters!

They came together united with one purpose – to admire me crushed, pulled out of my image, crucified on the window sill.
Their saliva was dripping even from their eyes like by those public execution goers.
They came to lynch me beforehand without waiting for the general meeting because in Bolshevik I had turned nose up at our Department girls.
Because of the unforgivable slogan ‘philfac forever!’

One of the girls even accused me of saying her something eye-to-eye which she wouldn’t forget until her last day and never forgive me that.
She even quenched a sob when telling her sad story.
Everybody rushed to inquire – what words were they? – but she only blew her nose and repeated her oath to carry them with her to the grave.
Even I got intrigued – what kind of so indelible words I could know?

Moreover, until that moment it never occurred to me she was from my course; I swear – I saw her for the first time!
Then I got tired of that Lynch trial session.
‘Okay,’ said I, ‘many thanks for your kind support but I still have to prepare my homework for tomorrow classes.’
Irina from Bakhmach almost choked with chortling.

At the meeting, after the overseer's declamation, a couple of my course-mates took the floor to confirm, that, yes, I went to work only when I wanted to and shamelessly slept on an oilcloth. 

Then Veerich made an attempt to break the monotonous mood.
He leaned on the lectern in front of the audience and began to broadcast what kind of a reliable comrade and friend I was and recently rescued a couple of freshman girls who had been subjected to hooligan harassment in the Count's Park. 
I bravely rushed at the villains although one of them had a neck from a broken bottle in his hands.

Veerich stepped out from behind the lectern and demonstrated the audience how to properly hold the neck in your hand and commented that such a weapon was more dangerous than a simple knife.
The audience froze in awed attention to the disclosed details. 

On the whole, he did not deviate too much.
That day Slavik and Twoik ran up to me from the hostel lobby.
There was a first-year student, they said, in a fit of hysterics.
Some guys had stopped her girlfriend in the park and were keeping her there.
The three of us raced to the indicated place and shooed off the locals.
And the saved beauty started to scream her guts out that we had ruined her personal life.
It seemed one of the would-be rapists had become her target.
Damn! Don’t call me anymore to save a twat gone hunting!

However, the detail with the bottle neck was brooded in the course of Veerich’s fantasy flight.
In the end, I was given the floor. 
‘Everyone is forging his own destiny.
Here is mine, white-hot, right from the forge and now it depends on you how it will turn out...’

Then I gave out a repentance a la Marc Novoselitsky at the meeting on behalf of the Game of Parties and with a minimal margin – who's for? against? abstained? – I received a severe reprimand with the final note of warning. 

(...although the outcome of the meeting was clear before it even started – if I were kicked out then where would you come from?
Certain shell-fragments just have to fly amiss…)

Every good news has some crappy lining.
Hardly had I time to rejoice that sending down whizzed harmlessly past, as I had again to stick my neck into the hateful noose. 
The KGB captain had beaconed with his newspaper – it's time to report and get instructions. 

At the meeting, it turned out that I became a hand-me-down at their enterprise. 
The captain for his heroism and vigilance displayed during the Game of Parties was encouraged by the rise from the provincial backwoods to the capital city of Kiev.
He did not hide his joy passing me as a stock-in-trade to his successor.

The successor was a black-haired young man who had just graduated from some institute in Chernigov at the Historical Department of which they were forging Party Cadres.
After that Department you weren’t sent to a village to work off your diploma, you got a position no lower than at a District Party Committee and then – grow up in your career to become a Member of the Political Bureau of the CPSU Central Committee, if your health conditions and aptness at making right choice would have it.
But not everyone is able to graduate that Department.

Two students from the Philology Department at NGPI got transferred there and a month later they blew off all the career prospects and returned back.
The discipline at that Historical Department was like that in a cadet school.
If at the lecturer's entering the classroom you did not stand at attention, then the group headman, also a student, would get at you like a construction battalion ‘pheasant' at a newly drafted ‘salaga'. 
And in the hostel, all kept strict to the rules and peeking after each other to catch pants down and knock on. 
After all, there were district committees and District Committees; one could be in a muddy district center, another in the capital city. 
A classic example of the struggle for survival – the more competitors you outlive, the harder it is to outlive you...

That young black-haired KGB man had a long sheepskin coat and did not inquire the price of mine. 
And he was much more mobile than the promoted captain, or maybe he just did not have time yet to get lazy.
He arranged meetings with me at various city institutions.
For instance, in ZAGS closed after a working day, or in the Tourism Bureau.

One time it was in an empty apartment on the fourth floor of a five-story building not far from the main square.
He brought with him his new boss to that meeting.
Once upon a time, they called a male of that boss's looks ‘an interesting man’ – gray hair in a clean cut above a youthful well-tanned face.
A European gloss was felt at once.
I don’t know what for he was transferred from Hungary to the provincial backwoods of Nezhin where he got interested in a rat whose finking helped his predecessor in promotion to Kiev.
However, I couldn't serve a springboard for him either. 
Enough was enough.
I had got fed up with that shit.

The black-haired almost cried from my invariable report that the current student youth was an amorphous mass thinking only about how much lard was left in their ‘torbas’.
The playful times of gamey gossip were over. 

But he had so irrepressible desire to dig something out that even send his secret collaborator to Room 72 in case I was a double agent and kept an underground printing house under my bed.

Of course, that seksot did not introduce himself as a rat with the pseudonym ‘Vova’ but I still figured it out.
Would a normal student from the Physics and Mathematics Department ask me for help with his English?
Taking into consideration my image?
Phooey!
The shammer drove a fool about living in the same hostel with me. 
Okay, bro! No problem!

 So, here he comes.
I hospitably encourage him to take a seat on a freshman’s bed and call the exercise number from the textbook he has brought with him.
He starts doing the exercise. 
Now I can return to the table with the players of started ‘pool’ of Preferans around it.
And what will he sneak into his notebook for his report to the KGB man: ‘seven spades’, ‘trick’, ‘pass’, ‘miser’?

At those times the Ministry of Health had not yet started to print its warning on cigarette packs.
The tobacco smoke floated in Room 72 in slowly tumbling layers.
The non-smoker Phys-Mat guy learned from his severe exposure that the stool-pigeoning was hazardous for health. 
It took him two visits to make sure that, yes, the student body was absolutely amorphous – just two kopecks for a trick.

But one time the young KGBist dictated me a report about Zhomnir.
There was nothing compromising in it, just that on such and such a day, at such and such an hour Zhomnir was coming out from the language laboratory. 
Well, the language laboratory was not a safe house and contained just the laboratory assistant at her desk and a swarm of freshmen behind the glass doors in the booth parroting the tape-recorded texts 'Meet the Parkers' from the headphones on their heads.
An absolutely inappropriate place for disseminating of the Ukrainian nationalism. 

I guess, the dictation was done just in case, after the KGB man found out that I was visiting Zhomnir at home to discuss my translations for ‘Translator’ which I never cut ties with.
Such a piece of paper could always come handy.
‘A familiar hand, isn’t it, Alexander Vasilyevich?’

My last mission was to get acquainted with an American.
There was a ten-day USA Agricultural Exhibition in Kiev and I was instructed to visit it and endeavor to make friends with at least someone from their staff.

I took Slavik with me and we whizzed by a local train to Kiev and there to the grounds of the Republican VeDeeNKHa with the exhibition in a huge hangar. 
Live Americans were then a rare phenomenon.
You could hardly tolter squeezed in the crow more dense than to the Lenin Mausoleum on the Red Square in Moscow, or in a traveling menagerie in Konotop on a Sunday day.

On entering the hangar you saw a huge portrait of US President Jimmy Carter with best wishes to the Soviet people, and the crowd carried you further along the shiny barriers with compartments on both sides – farm tractors, machines, pictures of happy rural life.
In one small section there stood a dummy pig, very nice, painted with large flower all over in style of the Beatles cartoon ‘Yellow Submarine’.
And next to the ornamented piggy there was a girl, alive.
Not my style, though, if you did not know she was an American you wouldn’t give her another look.
So, she stood by and repeated like a clockwork:
‘This is a piglet! This is a piglet!’
And her stare already dim and glassy, stunned with that rumbling crowd flowing past her for hours, like some Niagara Falls.
And no response from the waves of strange faces.
I pitied her, slowed down and said:
‘Call it ‘porosyonok’.’
‘This is a piglet! This is a piglet!’

(...at that time the two great nations were not yet prepared for a dialogue…)

I and Slavik went out of the hangar and sparked in the dank spring wind of the Republican VeDeeNKHa. 
And I reported to the black-haired that those Americans were too introvert.
He realized that both ‘introvert’ and ‘amorphous’ stuff was not the right thing for building his career up and grew sad.

That mission was the last one because of soon after I dug a hole for myself to fall in.

The black-haired already made me tired with his insolent demands to write a report and not to just play with the word order.
And there popped up something to make him happy without harming people...

In the institute reading hall, on the second floor of the New Building, I was leafing through a biography of Bogdan Khmelnitsky when on one of the pages I saw a mark in pencil ‘Bogdan Khmelnitsky is a traitor to the Ukrainian people'. 
I reported it in my next report to the KGB.
The guy was delighted – calling the initiator of the Ukraine and Russia reunion a traitor visibly smelled with the Ukrainian nationalism.
‘On which page?’
‘Well, somewhere in the middle.’

So, they arrested the book, found the unlawful page and at the following meeting:
‘But it was you who wrote that.’
‘What?!’
‘The hand is yours, that’s what. No use of denying. You’d better confess.’
And he started to intimidate me with a full-scale expertise.
Two weeks later he explained that the letter ‘a’ in the pencil inscription was very like to mine but a little different.
So the graphologist told him.
And—which is characteristic—he did not even apologize. 

In general, I, like, got offended and stopped to turn up for the loathsome datings no matter how diligently he flashed his semaphore newspaper. 
And at chance meetings in the city transport, I was cutting him dead with a disinterested indifference of a stranger. 
He seemed to understand that such a secret collaborator is as beneficial as two aces in the kitty when playing a miser in Preferans and pissed off.

So in the KGB archives there ceased to accumulate the reports with my handwriting signed as ‘Pavel'. 

(...yes, but now I have to rewind it – who were Slavik and Twoik?..)


They entered my life at the Hosty to replace Fyodor and Yasha.
First-year students.
Slavik was from Chernigov, he enrolled English Department and even lived in the same room with me.

He had also served in a construction battalion, but belonging to a well-to-do society stratum granted him a position in charge of a warehouse.
I mean he came from a family wealthy enough for keeping successful negotiations with the Commanders of his military unit.
And he also was drafted into a construction battalion because of some sight problems which he hid behind the half-dark lenses in his glasses.
The long forelock of straight chestnut hair slid across his forehead – from edge to edge. 
He did not shave the upper lip, saving soft female tendrils trimmed with scissors.

He, who has passed the school of construction battalion, does not need an explanation for the look of all-forgiveness and all-comprehension in the optics of his roommate returning from a walk in the Count's Park. 
A former conbatist will find in himself enough of determination to ask a direct question and, after a direct answer, to ask for it.
In circles of the enlightened, it is called ‘clinging to the tail'. 
The grass cemented us and made, practically, inseparable.

I remember the case of a winter suction when right in the middle of the week I decided to go to Konotop, by 3:15 local train there, by 19:05 back. 
So Slavik kept me company, that’s what a loyal friend is.

In Konotop we went to Lyalka who asked me if I remembered that bustard on a visit from St. Petersburg.
How not to remember?
I liked his shoes then: so heavy, one could see at once that sturdy. 
Lyalka had been conquering the visitor with the breadth of a lifestyle of our provincial backwater. 
He took the Petersburger to his section in the basement where the grass was reaching the condition; we sparked there – not bad it was, some grass for high flights.

‘So that bitch,' said Lyalka, 'two days ago bombed my basement. Broke the door and took it out. 
Seryoga the King saw him at the station getting on the Leningrad train with a backpack.’

Yea, that's what you call a clean work because St. Pete had always been the cultural capital of our country. 

In short, Lyalka forked out a couple of heads but with the warning that their quality hadn't been tested yet. 
I, just in case, dropped on Decemberists 13 and found one or two twigs in the attic of the brick shed.

On the back train, it became completely unbearable and in the car vestibule, I stuffed a joint of Lyalka's donation while Slavik represented a make-believe screen around me with his fur hat on top. 
We sparked it right there, smoked, entered the car and sat on the benches opposite each other.
He looked at me, I looked at him.
In the hope, so to speak, maybe it’s just that I didn’t have time enough to get it.
But it's all bullshit. 
If you start to cultivate wishful expectations of that sort then the stuff has no more dose than clippings from a kitchen broom.

We arrived at Nezhin.
Glum and dismal.
By the time we reached the Hosty it was completely dark.
But, just in case, we walked to the Old Building.
Night. Desolation. Winter.
I stuffed one from the grabbed at the attic.
Sparked it.
Slavik was standing by but manly restrained himself.
I took another drag and said:
‘Slavik,’ said I,
(...and from the marble plaque on the corner of the Old Building with the inscription “N. V. Gogol studied here...” my own words echoed back to me…)
‘It’s not in vain, that we have ridden three horses to death today.’
And I passed the joint into his craving claw...

As for Twoic, he actually was Sasha from Bakhmach. 
I named him ‘Eternal-Two-Getter' because ‘two' was the poorest mark for school kids, but then the handle was shortened to Twoic. 
He responded with handling me the 'Phooey-Pricker' derived from my half-tabooed warcry with which I answered any kickbacks in life:
'We’ll prick through any phooey!’

Actually, he was not from Bakhmach but from a village adjacent to it.
On that account, he preferred to play a role of a naive child of nature and a simpleton peasant. 
His parent provided him with ample grub, collecting a generous ‘torba’ each weekend when he started back to Nezhin.
All in all, it was a bulky farm boy.

A man's nature is best expressed in their laugh.
Twoic did it so:
A sharp yank up of his broad face to chortle out two-three squeaks with his eyes shut followed by slow lowering of the face back and, on the way, the pin-sharp pupils would frisk through the porthole of his squint checking the current situation: what and how?
Just so a recklessly cautious character...

He studied at the Biology Department and, therefore lived on the second (biofac's) floor of the Hosty.
He also was a ‘tail-clinger’ but not as keen as Slavic.

The main factor that made us into a trinity was Preferans.
A great game, if you take a look.
Poker, Snore, King or its reduced version – Eralush, are just contests for actor skills.
Preferans is an intellectual game of mind.
Only I had a constant bad luck at it...

I tried to break that tendency and tame the fortune and because of that, I kept taking desperate risks.
‘Bluish’ misers were the trademark of Phooey-Pricker.
Clearly realizing that because of the crimson tablecloth stolen from the redheaded dembel, I had fallen out of grace by Luck, I tried to overcome that status quo whatever the costs and grab anew the fortune’s forelock.
As a result, getting two or three ‘throw-ins' or even a ‘train' of them at playing a regular ‘bluish' miser, I sat in an indifferent and languid prostration until the end of the ‘pool of 40' in progress. 

I was paid a student scholarship of 45 rubles a month.
Almost every weekend my mother gave me 10 rubles before I left for Nezhin.
All the money went on my card debts, well, plus the havvage at the Canteen. 
The tall bottles with dry wine forsook me.
I switched to a healthy way of sober life.
Although being constantly washed-out was f-f.. flaming bending me out of shape.

Besides, Twoic and Slavik played ‘on one paw’, that is as a team, having conspired, which means forget the hope that your seconded King, or Queen with two cards, will ever bring you a trick. 
United efforts of two players ‘on one paw’ would strip the third one of a trick, or of a chip at 50% of the games in a pool.
Such is the law – severe, but just.
There are no bros at cards.
Shut up your driveling gape when among friends.

(...of course, you do not need to understand all this Preferans-terminology, but, to get the feel, imagine a couple of muggers working in a minibus: one holds the victim’s hands while the other rummages the pockets and pulls money out.
The difference, though, is that you won’t take the same minibus seeing them on it while with the Preferans you will come up to them next day and say:
‘Well, will we ‘draw a pool’ or will we?’
On their conspiracy, I was directly told years after the graduation…) 

Of course, I noticed their ‘one-paw pedal system’ of scratching one or the other eyebrow and pulling oneself behind the earlobe under the guise of reflexive body movements but I did not care a damn.
I was playing against my fate and did not care if it used them both as for its pawns in our gambling.

Knowing that they ‘play’ at Room 72, Preferans players from other Departments also came to us.
With those, I was breaking even.
I would have stayed in the win but for the adamant propensity for unreliable—‘bluish'—misers. 

In addition to partnership in cards, Twoic became a source of useful acquaintances.
A pair of cute, educated gays from the locals paid a couple of visits to our room.
One of them told ‘pinky’ jokes.
‘So, get, you nasty fascist, a grenade from a Soviet homosexual!’
He funnily and accurately conveyed the ‘pinky’ intonations.

And Dr. Grisha told how visiting the beach of Golden Sands in Bulgaria he screened his partner ripping off a golden watch from the clothes left on the sand by an Englishman taking a swim in the sea.
We laughed again.

No, Twoic was not gay.
I hadn’t seen a single one at the institute.
What’s the point?
To pass the examination and land among a group of girls?
So they just flashed by like a funny episode.

But Dr. Grisha was useful indeed.
Once he arranged a twelve-day sick leave for me; wrote somewhat bronchitis in the diagnosis.
Such a cute little man.
He had a very beautiful hair, though the word ‘hair’ wouldn’t suit it, I’d better say – a wavy chevelure.
And he was handsome of face, only that a little short.
But his brown soft briefcase was large, as well as his hips which he rolled in his gait. 
I was on quite friendly terms with him, despite the difference in orientation. 
Nothing like in case with Tughrik.
By the way, Dr. Grisha was also married and had two children; boys both of them...

And a three-day leave for acute respiratory disease, aka ARD, I could procure and without Dr. Grisha.
Behind the Old Building there stood one-story institute medical center.
You come here in the morning before classes and they give you a thermometer and, if there is the temperature, you get a stamped paper for ARD and three days of freedom. 
Only you need to warn the headman-girl of your group not to smear the log with ‘absent' marks, in three days she'll have the reference. 

Twoic, as a biology specialist, said that the temperature significantly rises in the strained muscles area.
And the armpit is a bunch of muscles.
Placing a thermometer in there, I started to rapidly strain and relax that area muscles under the clothes until the doctor, handled Pill, would say: 
‘Enough!’
And the result was never less than 37.3 degrees C. 

My falling ill so often perplexed Pill, where was my immune system?
Later on, her bewilderment transformed into angry suspicion and she started to check me with two thermometers at once, one for each armpit.
So the difference was only one-tenth: 37.3 and 37.2 – all the same ARD. 

And then Pill went amok.
‘Enough! Here’s a referral for you – go to the hospital!’
But I did not retreat and went there and lay in the hospital for a week and a half, for no reason, actually, just for the principle's sake...

With all that in mind, don’t forget about my main occupation – the studying.

I was sitting in the practical classes of my group, at times attended lectures for the whole course students, passed credits and examinations.
Besides, I never dropped self-education. 

In the second year, I was fortunate enough to meet ‘The Cavalry Army' and ‘The Odessa Stories' by Ivan Babel. 
He convinced me that even after the Revolution there remained writers in Russia and not just sholokhovs-proskurins-markovs.

On the third course, in the institute reading hall, I found magazines with ‘The Master and Margarita' by Bulgakov. 
It was a thunderstrike. 

In the final year, the endless, like the flow of the Nile, Thomas Mann’s ‘Joseph and his Brothers’ were attending the institute to keep me company through the long lecture hours.

I don't account for commonplace pulp fictions not related to my education that was read for a pastime. 
Say, there’s a stir in the Hosty:
‘Ah, Efremov! ‘Thais of Athens’! The peak and limit of the wildest dreams!’

Ilya Lipes gave that hetaera to me for two days.
I even had to go, after the midnight lights-out, in the corridor and read under the lamp above the doors to the washroom and the men’s toilet.
I was sitting in a chair dragged along, with my sheepskin coat thrown over the shoulders but not covering my bare legs, because I was too lazy to dress after reading in bed before the curfew. 
So what? Let them imagine I was on the beach...

But with all due respect to Lipes, that's not literature but just an illustration from the textbook ‘The History of the Ancient World’ for the fifth grade of secondary school.
When a schoolboy, I liked those colorful pictures of the Egypt slaves dragging stone blocks to the pyramids, of Roman legions on their march and the such like masterpieces.
Some gaudy means of education, no denying, yet comics strips and literature are not the same. 

However, you cannot know beforehand where a find might be awaiting you, and where a loss.
Sitting there, under the dark frozen window behind my back, with my eyes running over the lines describing an ancient festival where stark naked participants had a ritual ran through the night darkness, I had a vision again.
Just for a fraction of a second I got into a dark Greek night and ran completely naked in the shade of black trees under the big wet stars in the sky... 
But then – flick! – and I was back again in the sheepskin coat on a chair between the fluorescent lamp in the ceiling and the gray concrete floor stretched away into the darkness of the corridor in the fast asleep hostel, and my body still tense from that pair of hasty step-jumps in my run through that split-second, and my skin still feeling the chill of night from that distant past...

(...and what to do with all that?
Just do as everyone else – brush it aside, forget and live on.
But the book itself was, all the same, a sheer garbage…)

No better garbage were all those lectures: Theorgrammatics, Theorophonics, Scientific Communism, Aesthetics…

Although, I can understand, in part, the lecturers who poured them out; once upon a time they had to learn all that shit themselves.
And now, on the basis of the past sufferings, they tormented us, students, because of their personal dissatisfaction with so crappy life design.

‘Welcome to my glossed perineum,
The seat of fanciful zygotes...’

However, I even happened to like one of the theoretical lectures on… grammar?.. phonetics?. 
Well, in short, Scnar it was delivering it to us.
That’s only that he had such a last name, but he himself was a good guy.
When I was going to be locked up in the city hospital he lent me ‘The Quiet American’ by Graham Green, in English.
I'd hardly survive that week there alone because the neighbor patient in the ward made the window curtains to bubble with his snoring.

Before that lecture, when on a weekend in Konotop I visited Lyalka.
He wasn’t home and his brother Rabetus warmed me up.
I had never seen such grass yet.
Like, some thin dry skeleton of tiny twigs. 
And never had I had such a drag.
I saw Rabentus as if through a lens: his top and bottom narrow and the middle stretched. 
He noticed that I was dragged beyond the limits, advised to rinse my mug with the water from the tap. 
No use.
But I remembered that I still had to go to Nezhin.
On the way to the station, I dropped to Igor Recoon on the Peace Avenue. 
His mother:
‘How nice to meet you! Sit down, have a snack before the journey.’

As if I could sit!
It was dragging me back and forth – from the living room to the balcony, from the balcony to the living room.
I asked Igor to find some paper and write down the things I would say.
Something like:

‘The low sky beheaded the world...’

and then:

‘... shaggy clouds rub against the brain through the all mushy helmet of the skull ...’

Some surreal bullshit, in short, or else I’d got dragged into its quicksands and drowned.
In general, it's only on the train that I came back, between the Plisky and Kruty stations. 
And those psychedelic scraps Zhomnir later placed in the faculty wall newspaper next to ‘Translator’ he liked them so too much.
But all this not about that but about the lecture turned out by Scnar.

That time Rabentus gave me for a pair of joints and, knowing what kind of thermonuclear dope it was, I did not abuse it anymore but showed moderation. 
And in such a state—from moderate to quiet—I floated to the lecture because all the way to the hostel seemed too long and winding at the moment.

And we then sat down, and Scnar was reading from behind the lectern.
I admired what a classy thing!
The plywood all so yellow and well polished and gleaming pleasantly because of that.
And then I suddenly couldn’t get it – something was out of place and very obviously too.
Scnar switched to Latin!
I concentrated but – yes! – exactly Latin... 
And he was jetting it out even more fluenter, in a way, than Lupus the Latinist only that he sounded somehow hollow and his eyes were directed upward, like, to you I call de Profundis! 
I cocked up – was that Scnar, or not Scnar?

And I started to look more closely but above the lecturn of all the Scnar there now remained just a bust. 
I mean it, on the yellow box there stood the bust of Scnar even without arms – just only shoulders.
But the head continued to speak.
And on his upper lip there developed a dimple and it began to go deeper, darken and turn into the toothbrush mustache of Adolf Hitler.
Well, go and fuck yourself!
In a Soviet institute, Hitler's bust reads a lecture and that in Latin! 

Good fellow Scnar!
Not every lecturer would have the nerve to pull such a trick.
Without him, I would still think that if there's a lecture it's necessarily a bullshit. 
Stereotypes, they are very diehard crap.

And with Zhomnir I studied at his home.
On finishing another of translations I brought it to his place and he was shredding it in a dragon-like style at the table in his living room – here’s not the thing, there’s not the thing.
Yes, I felt it before his picking the holes out that those were bosh places, but why? And what another way could it be said?
‘That’s your problem. Find it.’
‘And what if to put it, say, so and so?’
‘No! Don't get over the measure!' 

It was impossible to please him, he would always find what to find fault with.
And because of that, the work with Zhomnir was a good school not to give up.

To relax from the clutches of the Ukrainian language, aka ‘mova’, I asked Zhora Ilchenko for one of the books he brought from India and started translating it into Russian.

Not a too thick book, some two hundred pages, authored by Peter Benchley, a writer in the third generation, that is both the grandpa and daddy were engaged in the same craft.
It was titled ‘The Jaws’, about a shark-cannibal.

A professionally mixed vinaigrette on the whole – a little scrap of everything: bitten-off limbs, a love triangle, the mafia looming in the background. 
True, the final scene of the shark's death unscrupulously copied from 'Moby Dick', but who now reads Melville? 

I finished off a pack of thick copybooks rendering all that in Russian.
The translation was completed in Konotop in winter. 
So, it was the night from Saturday to Sunday or maybe on the winter holidays.

The clock on the kitchen wall was showing some of the small hours.
Putting the final period I draw it as big as half a page – I wanted to finish off the ink in the ball-pen but it never ended.
I turned off the light and lay on the sofa in the living room.
Behind the two windows stood a whitish night dimly fluoresced with the snow.
And it seemed that it, the night, was leaning heavily against the window panes, just about to break in.
I tried to get asleep as soon as I could for I never liked horror movies. 

My sister Natasha read those notebooks and then lend someone else to read and they dissolved, without a trace, in nowhere...

Well, all that’s fine; but when about the main?

Eera.

My relationship with her at that time can be defined with one word – 'torment'.
If trying real hard you can enhance the definition with one more word – 'martyr's torment'.

To begin with, it was not an easy task to resume relations with her in Nezhin.
Why to resume? 
 But I was in love, damn it!
In love at first sight on that path through the wet stalks of corn.

And mind you that, by nature, I am a single-love man.
To fall in love, then to fall out of love, then in again, then out… – that’s not for me.

Not without reason my father often applied to me the winged expression that my Laziness-Mommy was born a moment before me.

Besides, Nezhin confirmed the rightness of my love – with all the multifacedness, multinosedness, multileggedness, multibreastedness of choice – she was the second to none.

Starting from the clothes:
in the era of shortages, she managed to look in a European way, as in the movies of Italo-Franco-German production.
Turning to the linen:
I have never seen such delicately feminine lingerie in my life.
Passing to the most important – to the body.
Such bodies as hers I had seen only in the bathroom at the Object, sitting next to the flames of fire burning in Titan when I was staring at the statues of the Goddesses, the Dryads, and the Nymphs of Hellas in the black and white illustrations in the book of Myths and Legends of Ancient Greece.

But her gait was quite modern – a German-style sweepingly wide step, a decisive move of hands.

She had a round face with high cheekbones and a nose with a tiny hump; wide, but not turned out lips.
The light brown hair of the ideal length, in my favorite hairstyle.

I liked to watch her approaching in her resolute step along the street coming up to the Old Building and to follow how in the distant circle of her face the fuzzy, as in the full moon, lines began to emerge into Eera.

But all that came about not immediately.

At first, she believed the Olya's sinister predictions. 
And even Vera, who had so sympathetically been preparing the bed in Bolshevik for two of us to wade in rolling streams of the voluptuous carnal pleasures, answered with a hesitant shrug of her shoulders – such heinous things are told about him! 
So our first meetings in Nezhin were far from encouraging and I even started to suspect that all between us in Bolshevik was nothing more but a ‘collective farm affair’ of a teacher's daughter using me.
And I pissed off.

After some time a group-mate of Eera, Anna, came to my hostel with the errand from Eera waiting for me in the room of their Department hostel in the main square.
I followed the messenger swearing myself on the way for the shameful lack the male pride... 

Eera was lying on one of the beds, for some reason without a sweatshirt, but in a beautiful, as always, women’s underwear.
The room inhabitants tactfully left us alone.
I sat down on the bed next to her, trying not to show how captivated I was by the beauty of her torso and the strangely pale face.
She said that she had had a pregnancy and a young surgeon-gynecologist made her an abortion at his home under anesthesia.
Is abortion done under anesthesia? At home? Young? 

(...certain thoughts are better never be thought at all…)

Feelings of guilt and compassion added to my love.
I couldn’t help it, I put my arms around her shoulders and, lifting her from the pillow, pressed to my chest.
‘I love you, Eera. You always know that I love you.’

(...and again I run into my being born at a not right time. 
I behave like an ancient Greek from the times when the birth control was a responsibility of women. 
And in the modern enlightened age the weaker sex has already saddled us and mounted while still pretending to be weak…)

In addition to the initial misunderstandings (thanks to the kind care of her girlfriends), we couldn't enjoy normal sexual relations in the first stage of love. 
Not because of no favorable conditions for having sex, on the contrary.
When Eera visited Room 72 my first-year cohabitants, on their own accord, went to the first floor of the hostel to click the TV channels or sit over a bottle of lemonade in the refreshment room.
The problem had deeper roots…

Not at once, but I noticed that after our having sex Eera got in a plaintive mood and on the way from Hosty to her home she spoke of sad things.

How sad it is, when the wind's dragging the autumn leaves across the stadium where you've come to say goodbye to track athletics because of a ligament injury after two years of training...

How sad it is, when at a festive table your parents are got so absorbed in an agitated discussion of their relationships that they do not notice you taking already the third plate from the table and slowly letting it fall to the floor with the scattered fragments of the first two – snap! – before mom and daddy wake up and finally turn to you...

The further, the sadder.
The mood changes got substituted by an undisguised sabotage!
How else to call it if at the end of having sex your partner wriggles out from under you?
It took me a hell of the effort to elicit the reason for that incomprehensible behavior.

Because she felt something like an urge for uncontrollable urination.

(...long live to our Soviet education system – the best system in the world!
It couldn’t cripple the village schoolkids to such a degree, though.
They were saved by direct observation of the natural facts of life.
A village girl would figure out at a glance what, actually, she had being mounted with.
But the poor city dwellers?

Among the color illustrations at the end of Anatomy textbook for the 8th grade, there was an image of dick modestly hidden among intestines out-poured from the belly on the general scheme of internal organs. 
Those appended pictures children studied on their own because during the academic year the class managed to reach only half of the textbook.
How could a poor teacher's daughter know the difference between orgasm and urination?..)

I cannot state that the problem had been solved because of my persistent requests to trust her own body which was wiser than her.
In any case, she gave up wriggling out...

All those painful crises in the relationship called for general relaxation and restoration of the dented self-esteem. 
These factors led to the emergence of Sveta, who lived in the same hostel with me, and Maria, who did not live in the hostel but came on occasional visits, and more oftener I went to spend the night at her place... 

Despite the fact, that Sveta studied at the Biological Department, she lived on the fifth floor in the hostel. 
During one of her visits from the fifth floor to the third, she got conquered by my restraint.

I had just returned from seeing Eera to the vestibule of her house when they told me there was chicken soup on the table in Room 77.

One of the advantages of a student canteen is that after visiting it you still can find enough room in your system for a chicken soup at any time of day. 

I entered the room and turned on the light.
On one of the beds there lay a girl who did not make a secret of the fact that she had nothing on apart from a bed sheet.
There was a pot on the table and a couple of spoons.
Taking the lid off the pot uncovered the presence of the soup, about two servings.
I wiped off one spoon, sat on a vacant bed and started eating. 
The soup was cold, but unmistakably of chicken.

The girl wrapped in the bed sheet protested that the light was preventing her from falling asleep. 
Turning the light off, I threw the door open, because eating soup in the dark is uncomfortable, and finished it off in the dim illumination from the corridor lamp. 
Some delicious soup, I liked it notwithstanding it’s being cold.
Then I left.

‘The less we love a woman,
The more we’re liked by her...’

So the wounds inflicted by the tormenting love  I began to heal with medicinal visits to the fifth floor in the hostel.
Sveta was simply created for that.
Not tall, with a boyish haircut, she had a slender body and generous breasts.
She was good at anything but her special dish was the blowjob. 
And she literally lost her head from touches to her nipples.
A happy gift of nature for both her and you...

In addition to psychological issues resulting from the Soviet school system, I sometimes ran into irreconcilable ideological clashes with Eera.

Once the institute authorities ordered a volunteer clean-up in the Count’s Park.
The girls of my course were raking the fallen leaves in great heaps and Igor Recoon and I set them on fire. 

After translating ‘The Jaws' I knew that burning leaves in the open was a crime against the planet's atmosphere; there was a short passage to it in the book. 
But could you prove anything to anyone?
‘Sehrguey, don't put airs on! Everyone does it. We're not in America.' 
When in Rome do as Romans do.
The Count’s Park got drowned in white smoke and we dispersed.

Bypassing the Old Building I saw a girl in sportswear and liked her from afar.
I didn’t even know why she attracted me so.
A wide white kerchief around the neck, with big black spots, that's for one. 
But not only because of that.
And not for the sneakers.
I came closer – what the f-f.. damn! – but that’s Eera herself!
And feeling so deeply moved by the pleasant surprise I immediately told her how I had just fallen in love with her once again.
‘You had not known it was me but fell in love?’
‘Yes! Can you imagine?’
‘How could you!’
‘But with you!’
‘You had not known it was me!’
‘But think a bit! Since it turned out you, then I have no chance to fall in love with anyone else. It’s only you that I can love.’
‘If you a minute ago fell in love, you’ll do it again!’
‘Who with? Isn’t it clear it’s only you who turns me on?’
‘You still can't get it!’
‘Okay. So I shouldn’t have fallen in love with you?’
‘No!’
‘Never?’
‘No, never!’
A vicious circle – love me yet never fall in love with me.
But she was really cool in her sports, and moved so classy…

(...with all my mug's game to show off as a crossbred of Casanova and a refined aristocrat of the spirit, I, actually, am a classic example of a dull patsy. 
Why?
Too gullible and too ready to fall for a new bauble... )

It was enough for Ilya Lipes to drop an unfamiliar word ‘she-oxen’ and I followed him like a puppy on the lead.
‘Come on! Let’s visit she-oxen!’
The casually used term triggered an imagination flight picturing a flock of free of complexes hetaeras but in reality, they were the same girls as in the hostel. 
One she-ox was throwing her birthday party.

And now in that half dark room in an old private house, we were, like, having fun, like, dancing all-out fast dance. 
Then I would lay with some of them on one of the beds in the next room and she would eagerly get topless and then block any further movements, like any other oxen-vixen: 
‘Do not torture yourself nor me!’
And I got blues and went out in the corridor to rang Eera and once again announce my love. 
A sentimental patsy.

And she immediately got it:
‘What music is there? Where are you?’

Usually, I called her from the booth in Hosty's lobby. 
That was almost soundproof, the vestibule by the locked entrance door partitioned with glass from the vestibule of the open one. 
We would talk for hours if not for her people at home needed the telephone, or some student started to knock at the glass door from the lobby. 
Talks about absolutely nothing.
I just loved to hear her voice.
She would say a word there and I got carried beyond myself here...

‘Just at one place, I'll explain later. Not a phone talk. I love you. Bye.' 

(...everyone knew then, that the phones were tapped so the phrase ‘not a phone talk’ excluded further questions…)

And later I had to drive a fool to the tune as if a buddy drag dealer had come to Nezhin for a visit and asked to accompany him to a safe house of his where the music was played on the account of the high guest arrival but I did not stay there and left after calling her. 
Some stuff that would hardly fit even in an elephant’s ears.
To believe such an ear-bending bullshit one has to really want to believe. 
Although, she might have believed after those icons.

Ah, yes, the icons…

They told me that Veerich wanted to see me and I went to his place.
At the winter holidays, he was skiing in the Carpathians and broke one of his legs and both skis. 
So he kept to bed, plastered.
He and his student wife rented a flat in the city.
When she went out to the kitchen, Veerich started his monologue about too long and dirty hand of Zionism stretched out to our cultural heritage and spiritual assets.

That all was to the fact that Ilya Lipes had three or four Orthodox icons in his briefcase under his bed in the hostel.
Somewhere they had bombed a village church and now Lipes wanted to push the catch off like antique rarities.
Who could bear such arrogance? 
If not for the plaster Veerich himself would not allow trampling our holy shrines… 
In short, could I bomb the icons back and restore the historical justice?

(...as for the differences between the religious confessions Veerich was cracking a nut with a sled-hummer. 
I could still believe in Zeus or, say, Poseidon, but all the modern gods in the vogue do not stir any sympathy in me though (which is characteristic) I don't believe in atheism either. 
But the request to bomb was properly addressed.
No problems.
I’m doing what I'm told and think after…)

In the morning I waited for the students to leave the hostel for their respective classes.
One kick in a door in the silent corridor and the lock jumped out.
Everything as described – the briefcase under the bed, the icons in the briefcase.
They have a good nose for such things those Serbs, even in the third generation.

I left the briefcase where it was and took the icons to the washroom.
They looked like the one Grandma Katya had in her hutta only on bigger boards.
My black ‘diplomat’ case was already waiting for me in under the sink in the partitioned compartment of the washroom.
The icons fitted in perfectly. 

And then I felt the truth of the proverb about chickens stealing. 
‘Your hands are really trembling! Been stealing chickens, eh?' 
My fingers were shaking with uncontrollable tremor.
But not the way they shook after the capsizing in the UAZ truck.
That tremor had been like somewhat shallow while in the washroom, my fingers were just knocking against each other. 
That’s what sacrilege brings about.

I didn’t care for the finger-prints.
Ilya would not go to the criminal investigation:
‘Please, check for the traces on my briefcase where I kept the icons from a robbed temple.’
However, taking the catch directly to Veerich was not correct.
So, I asked Eera to keep my case at home for a couple of days, she was on a sick leave then.

Then, like an exemplary student, I attended the classes and, already after the canteen, climbed up to the third floor in Hosty.
There I witnessed a noisy commotion in the corridor.
The room of Lipes had been broken in!
I approached and saw that the door was indeed kicked open.
Dirty bastards!
And what’s missing?
Ilya kept silent to my question and bitterly tut-tuting from the frustration...

And then I decided to finally break up with Eera.
Was not that enough for heartbreaking harrowing?
Moreover, because she absolutely didn't trust me.

I received a letter:
‘Sehrguey,
I have been fascinated by you for so long, but I did not dare to say it.
Today I'll be waiting for you at 19.00 near the Old Building. 
Lyuba’
That evening I escorted Eera to the vestibule of the staircase entrance in her apartment-block and there she flamed in a passionate fire:
“Do not go, please, just stay a little longer!’
I looked at the watch it was ten to seven.
‘Well, the guys are waiting at Hosty. We agreed to draw a pool in Pref.’
‘They can wait. Don’t go!’
I hardly managed to leave.

When I neared the Old Building it was exactly seven.
I had checked the time under a street lamp on the way.
And on the square in front of the Old Building, there was nobody. 
But I did not stop there smoking, waiting. 
No.
I diagonally crossed the empty square.
Only a bit slowly.
I had all the right to admire the nature of the winter evening, after all, had I? 

That pine tree looks like a cedar.
Could it really be a cedar?
In those dense branches, there lives an owl, in amidst their thicket, it's twilight there even in the afternoon for him. 
And on the snowdrift under the pine-cedar the offals of his feasts with small rodents.
One of the sanitary care-takers of nature. 

And by the way, I hadn't lied. 
The moment I entered Room 72 Slavic and Twoic followed me: 
‘Well, will we draw a pool, or will we?’

Soon I found out that the letter was written by Eera's girlfriend.
Eera was dictating for the girl to write.
Her name was not ‘Lyuba’, though...

All are attracted by the novelty, but the dull patsies are get also caught.

Well, and besides, there appeared Maria.

A brunette of the age so praised by Balzac.
When she smiled at me on the sidewalk I did not immediately get it why. 
It turned out she had had dropped for a couple of minutes to that she-ox’s birthday only I did not notice when.
In general, she explained in what apartment-block she lived and said the apartment number.
42.

Though I had a busy day with a concert in the assembly hall of the Old Building, I found time and money for a bottle of vodka.
I carried it with the Alimosha trick – in the sleeve. 
It made for such a hard bicep.
So I came to the address, the fourth floor, the door to the left.
She opened it.
We had a little snack and landed on the sofa.

I do not like to cum when I had just started, but it happens.
"I'm sorry,' I said, ‘ I'm in a hurry. There's a concert at five.' 
Which concert? Where?.

She sat in the second row when I from the stage, and already with the bass guitar, and already as the leading vocalist, was screaming: 

‘Do you remember those two sta-a-rs?!
That disappeared from the sky?!..’

A third-year student, Vitya Kononevich, played the rhythm guitar and sang along backing with a third; and on the drums some, well, Lyosha, it seems, also from that course, a local guy.

After the concert, Maria and I had a walk. 
She led to a friend of hers.
The woman brought a mug of medical alcohol out to the staircase landing and a piece of fish for a snack.
It was 96% spirits because the tongue stuck to the palate.
But since then our go-rounds with Maria were not inferior in duration to the acts in the plays of Shakespeare.

She had a son sixth-grader, who I never met, and the one-room apartment. 
Apart from the sofa, there was a double bed and a radio receiver on the nightstand next to it. 
All the night long it was playing softly to itself in the middle waves ranges glowing with its small yellow eyelet. 

And her cummings really superb:.
‘More! More! A! I wanna.. Mo-o-ore! A!.’
Maybe it had been her worked out coda, but still a cool one.

And she couldn’t tolerate the smell of the seed, so immediately asked to go to the bathroom.
I went at once, she was worth it.
For my obedience, she did me a massage that was her profession. 
I couldn’t get it why they were so crazy about it. Oh, massage!
But I did not contradict here either.

Sometimes, even very late, the doorbell rang.
She rose from the bed, threw on her long gown and went out to the landing to have a word with the untimely visitor.
I was not quibbling, I understood that a nurse, even a masseuse, had somehow to survive in this world.

She had a beautiful body, as in black and white pics of Soviet amateur pornography, and she herself, too, in that Transcarpathian style.
But she did not take off her nightgown in bed, or very rarely, she said there was a breast problem, mastitis, or something.
And after so many runs into ‘eager-top-unsurrenderable-downs' that change was even refreshing. 
More so because she knew how to use her lower parts.
‘And may I do so?’
And would start such a ‘so’ that I never imagined possible, and did not even imagine at all.
Yes, you may and welcome too!
When dropping to Room 72, she skillfully used its plain furniture set there.

In between having sex we had friendly and benevolent relations.
She shared her plans for buying me a pair of slippers and promised to cure when I catch a venereal disease.
She told me…

However, it doesn't matter, otherwise, I will never finish. 
Like after a mug of medical alcohol.
In a word, I wanna say, Balzac was not a fool, even being a Frenchman...

On May 1st, being one of the only four boys on the course, then, whether you want it or not, you had to carry a portrait of a member of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the CPSU. 
After passing over the main square in the institute’s columns that member still had to be taken to the Old Building and handed over to the House Manager.

When I had already left the Manager’s storeroom, Slavic warned me that he saw Eera in front of the Old Building and she asked him where I was.
Slavic knew that I had broken up with her for over a month, that's why he warned.

That separation was not easy for me.
The evenings stretched endlessly long without her voice over the telephone.
And I was missing her German step from afar.
Occasionally seeing her in the institute corridors I got convinced over and over again that there was no one more beautiful than her and my heart tightened bitterly.
But still and yet I had to be firm and put the final period, after all...

So to avoid an unbearably tormenting encounter I decided to sit in the Old Building until she left.
Moreover, on a country outing the day before with Maria, we agreed to spend May Day at her place. 

For the outing, we went to the station and in the bright rays of the sunset walked along the path by the tracks to the forest on the outskirts. 
We met a pair of workmen on the way.
One of them started to yelp something but I paid no attention – anyone would envy when you go to the wood with so a juicy beauty and the nightingales around tear themselves apart in so vigorous trills that those stand up like a dense wall of sound. 

We found a clearing among the trees and in the gathering darkness, I built a fire. 
It was very warm, she even took off her cloak. 
We did not have glasses for the wine.
‘More! A! More!..’
The bonfire was already burnt out and in the iridescent glow of its coals, an indistinct shadow rushed across the clearing. 
A dog.
How scared she got!
There is nothing more appealing than women’s fears.
And you, like, an epic knight protectively embrace her shoulders. 
I even wanted it again.
‘More! Mo-ore!.’

We were returning already in the middle of the night and had for a long time waited at the bus stop. 
It turned to be the last bus carrying workers of the defense plant Progress after the second shift.
Or rather, female workers, there were only women on the bus.
They gave Maria so unfriendly looks.
Like, we were slaving like the cursed and that bitch horsing around with her fucker.
In the spring even females become fiercely brutal...

That is to say that I did not need that meeting with Eera.
I waited for another twenty minutes before I left the Old Building. 
‘Sehryozha!’
She still waited between the massive columns on the high porch.

Well, what could I do if she was so beautiful?
If I had to tame my breath and heart?
We went around the corner with the plaque ‘Here N. V. Gogol studied...' and stopped to talk under the wall with high ancient windows. 
I was astonished at her pallor.
Not grayish sick, but as of thin china.
White, on the brink of transparency, porcelain.
I did not know what was tearing my heart more, her beauty, or my pity for her.
What a stupid brute I had been! 
I had tortured both her and myself so long so much!
I again was embracing her.
She laughed and cried on my chest.
How I loved her!

That cursed month she was coming home and just lay down prostrate.
The pain was literally physical and nothing mattered at all.
Mommy did not know what to do,
‘What’s wrong with you, Eera?’
‘Nothing.’

The beast! Bastard!
How pale she was!
And so beautiful.
‘Come on to Hosty. The room is vacant.’
She happily went home to change and tell her mother that she was celebrating and spending the night at a girlfriend’s.

(...in the Soviet holidays most of all I liked the calm following the demonstrations.
The streets got empty, almost no traffic nor pedestrians.
People went home, starting to celebrate...)

The hostel was also empty.
Except for the Room 72 on the third floor.
That was our room, our hostel, our holiday. 
The Feast of Reconciliation.

Sveta nearly spoiled the holiday. 
Taking advantage of the solitude and quietness in the corridor of locked doors I ventured to the toilet in only my underpants and on the way back I entered the washroom.
It was there that she screwed me over.
‘What’s that!’
And she began to talk my ear off that she'd never put up with an expansion of the staff without a preliminary coordination. 
She was forgiving me Eera, forgiving Maria, but who that new whore in my room was?
‘Are you crazy? That’s Eera!’

Well, she had just peeped in and there was someone standing by the window.
Where could Eera possibly have such a cute negligee from?
As if I knew. I saw it for the first time also.

On the second day, I left Hosty in the morning. 
In the grocery store on the main square, they were selling a rare deficit: white and blue cans of condensed milk. 
Proud with the hunted prey, I returned to Room 72 and Eera said from the bed by the window: 
‘So? You brought condensed milk?’
I was f-f.. well, I mean, flabbergasted.
‘You… what.. that is, how?’
‘You’ve got such a pleased nose, it was seen at once.’

And possessing such skills to write counterfeit letters?
There was something, not that… 

So I surrendered and we started to live on as one common united family.
They call it polygamy in books.
I was sort of the uniting link in it.

(...the link should master and keep to one golden rule – no names.
‘Darling' is the very thing, it sounds pleasant and causes no misunderstandings. 
Perhaps, someone would prefer ‘pussy’ or ‘bunny’, it’s a matter of taste, but, in my humble opinion, why to start up an extra zoo?
‘Yes, darling...’
‘Come on, darling...’…)

Sveta did not kick up excess dust anymore.
She clearly knew her exact place – after Eera, before Maria.

Officially, the girls were not introduced but knew about the existence of the others. 
Eera and Sveta for sure, Maria, most likely – yes.
In communication with the darlings, I was not particularly keen on that topic – who knows what about who, but Nezhin was a provincial town where everyone knew everything about everybody else.

When in the third year I was having a pedagogical practice at School 2, one of the teachers there started giving out some disparaging information about Maria.
She took special care not to look at me, but at my course-mate who also practiced there.

That my course-mate was a very studious student.
And she took so great pains preparing for her first practice lesson.
At home, she collected all her dolls and puppets and arranged them sitting in a row upon the piano lid and started getting prepared:
‘Good morning, children!..’

(...infantilism is a deadly weapon, for me it’s more terrible than a machine gun.
I mean, it makes me wanna puke…)

Nothing like the newlywed couple on our floor in Hosty.
After their marriage, they got a whole room for themselves. 
The students living there had moved to other rooms, but the furniture remained.
At times, to relax after intense mental work in their educational process, they arranged ‘races’ on Saturdays.
A couple of other students from the floor were invited for an overnight stay and after the dinner, they started the ‘race' heats with the change of partners. 
I do not know the details, though, I did not participate in those races.
Vitya Kononevich was a leading jockey there...

(...honestly, if you ask me, having sex is something just for two.
It is of so intimate a nature that even a condom doesn't fit in two's company. 
I understand that I’m fairly old-fashioned but there's nothing doing about it, that is my innate quality...)

In the summer my pioneer practice was held at the camp ‘The Young Construction Worker' near the town of Sednev. 
At the times of Chernigov princedom there stood a mighty fortress for defense from Tatars, Lithuanians, or Novgorodians – whoever would come to plunder.
And now of all the fortress there remained just one tower.
From the tower, a steep winding descent led down to the bridge connecting the sandy banks of the Snov river. 
After the bridge in the small pine forest were two pioneer camps, side by side: ‘The Young Construction Worker’ and ‘The Young Chemist’, followed by the boundless wheat fields.

My trainee position at the camp was that of a substitute caretaker.
That meant that when the caretaker of some platoon went to Chernigov I was to oversee the on-duties kids from her platoon laying tables in the canteen for breakfast, midday meal, tea, and supper and if on that day the camp was taken out to the river I had to watch that the platoon’s pioneers did not splash outside the iron grid but only in the fenced part of the river.

Going to Chernigov was not so easy because of transportation problems and caretakers rarely went there.
So all my job was to switch on the music from the radio-unit to broadcast from the camp loudspeakers and also announce at the microphone the start of the ‘dead’ hour and ‘lights-out’.
I don't know why I was doing it with feline intonations of a gay. 
‘Attayntion! Leets-ouwt for thee camp!’

The radio-unit was in the senior pioneer leader’s room partitioned from a small gymnasium stripped of any equipment except for one bed on which I slept.
The door in the far wall of the gym opened onto the stage of a small auditorium in the open air surrounded by pine trees.
I was kicking back, and reading what would turn up in the camp library, and growing my beard because after the camp I was going to work with the student construction platoon of the NGPI. 
In a word, I was indulging in a life of an unshaven renegade.

In the position of the senior pioneer leader was my course-mate Irina from Bakhmach.
I somehow did not immediately realized that she was courting me until her invitation to the ancient tower of Sednev with the small built-in romantic restaurant.
Through the loopholes in the thick (no less than a meter and a half) walls on the plain far below were seen the shadows from summer clouds flowing in gallop like a raiding horde of robbers.
She treated me with a blackberry liqueur which I did not like, some cloying swill.

In the two years of studying she obviously re-evaluated her standpoints and priorities, compared to the night that we spend together when being the first year students. 
However, I couldn’t in earnest consider her for practical purposes.
Not because of being a vengeful dickhead ‘aha! you didn’t give it then so go without now!’
No, it’s not like me.
The reason was my dutiful commitment to what I’m told.
They say ‘no’ to me and I obediently retreat, but in order that later I get at it again they have to explicitly tell me ‘come on here’.
She pinned her hopes on the liqueur alone to do the trick.

And I also couldn’t concentrate on the other trainee, one more Irina, but already from Nezhin, the daughter of pro-rector Budowski.
Firstly, I disliked both his bald head and his general moral character, and secondly, she was an unmistakable virgin. 

So the champion laurels in the contest, quite predictably and inevitably, went to the blonde sports trainer, again Irina, from the neighboring ‘The Young Chemist' camp. 
At first, we were dating on the river bank in the company of her receiver ‘spidola' but it was warmer in my gym. 

Once I entertained a group of visitors comprising Slavic, Twoic, and Petyunya for playing Preferans and Sveta for everything else.
After the game, the boys started racing around the gym after the hedgehog brought to me by pioneers that day. 
I asked them not to torment the animal and they switched over to voyeuristic eavesdropping to the erotic arias from the radio-unit room where Irina from Bakhmach had a guest who visited her on the same day, also from Bakhmach.

Then I gave the boys a pair or two of camp cloth blankets for them not to sleep on the bare floorboards and turned off the light. 

Sveta, who had the legitimate right to a part of my bed, performed from that elevation before the three, frozen in awe and admiration, music lovers on the floor a concert for a flute without an orchestra.

Another time I went to Nezhin, on a sort of day off, but thee I behaved like a pig. 
I swallowed too many pills and dining in the canteen room at the station had almost fallen asleep in a plate of borshch.
Eera got outraged and left.
Slavic, who was also going to Chernigov had to drag me, like a vegetable, into the diesel train.
Because the branch line to Chernigov was not electrified.

I slept off on the diesel train but I still remained bored because everything was so dull.
I felt like that for the most time of that practice.
Dull and unnecessary was that I lied to a mujik in the field who asked which camp I was from.
Why did I say I was from ‘The Chemist’?

And it was dull when a pack of youngsters from Chernigov came to the pine forest by someone’s daddy’s Volga.
They kicked up thief-swagger and one of them pulled a big handsome dagger I looked around for a stick, although it was obvious that he would be happy be relieved of the weapon. 
A second of delay, the moment was lost and the trophy went to the chauffeur of the camp. 
Well done, mujik!

And because of being bored and off-hand when diving from the high bank I, like, dislocated something in my back and a couple of days was turning to the sides with my whole body. 

And also dull was taking a swim at night even after some car drove on the bank flashing the headlights at the girls who had already changed their mind to enter the river and I had to get out of the water in altogether just as I had come to this world, armed only with a distorted expression of the unshaven face. 
I do not know what aboriginal mask my face looked like at that moment but they switched off their headlights.

Later Irina from Bakhmach was making sport of my dick size not living up to her expectations. 
It did not hurt my feelings because of everything was so boring…

‘A vain present, a chance present,
Why are you given to me, Life?...’

Yet, when on the Poseidon Day the pioneers of both camps caught me, dragged and threw into a pond by the river it was not boring, it was right.
At first, I felt offended and wet, but then like laughing. 
Well done, kids!
Served the bastard well! 

The night before the departure Irina the trainer and I once again sat on the river bank.
There were so many stars that you could hardly see the sky behind them and I had blues that everything was somehow going away and getting lost.
She for some reason did not want to have sex and we just sat leaning our backs against each other. 
The stars were shining both from beneath—reflected in the silent flow of the Snov—and from above too.
They were everywhere and will be and yet it’s impossible to keep them.
Everything flows away.
Probably, I had blues because of the ‘spidola’ that suddenly began a sermon in English.

I did not understand at all what all that was about because it was not the English Department’s language laboratory texts about the family of Parkers but you could guess that it was a sermon.
I escorted Irina to ‘The Young Chemist’.
She went in and locked the gate, but I called her again.
We climbed the grating of the gate from both sides and had the final kiss, a camp kiss on top of the grating.
Forgive me and goodbye, my loss...

I knew the city of Pryluky for a long time, yet in absentia.
On the back of the Prima cigarette packs, there was printed the city's name. 
‘cigarette f-ka m. Pryluky.’
The city of Pryluky was rebuilt by the Germans during its occupation so the streets in it were strictly parallel and methodically perpendicular to each other.
Except for the outskirts where the bus station was later built.

The Commander of the student construction platoon was Vladimir Maiba, from the Physics and Mathematics Department.
The platoon’s Commissar was Igor, a Ukrainian nationalist.
He suspected Maiba to be a secret collaborator of KGB and therefore was constantly mocking him and discrediting his authority in every possible way. 
And I was a leading specialist, sort of, because in my military ID I was announced as a ‘bricklayer’.

There were two girls and fifteen guys in the platoon plus the above mentioned commanding staff.
We stayed in a hostel of ‘chemists’ but only for one night and in the morning were to go to Auto-Depot 4 which was on the highway stretch between the Ivkovtsy village and the town of Ladan.

‘Chemists’ were prisoners who for their supposedly good behavior were paroled from the zone to finish their term off ‘on a chemistry’.
Any plant or a factory with production lines hazardous to health, a mine, a construction site would do to serve ‘a chemistry' for paroled prisoners. 

The control over the ‘chemists’ was pretty tough.
They should be present in the hostel no later than a specified hour, not be drunk, not bring whores and many other ‘nots’.
Yet they were not guarded and overseen by the turnkeys and did not sleep in the common dormitory.
And they even got some payment to be shared with the curator militiaman on whom it depended they do not lose the parole and get back to the zone.

After the shower, I and Igor, who although being a Ukranian nationalist spoke a very good Russian and dreamed of moving to St. Petersburg, the cultural capital, went out to check the geometrical correctness of Pryluky. 
‘Katranikha! I am damned! Is that you?' 
‘Don’t shout! Some of my pupils can be around. I’m a teacher here.’
Well, of course, sorry, how could I forget myself.
For one year already she was disseminating there the seeds of the wisdom, of kindness and values eternal...

Auto-Depot 4 was all by itself, neither in a village nor in a town, just behind the forest belt bordering the highway. 
First, there was an old two-story building.
On the first floor it had some locked warehouses and on the second floor, there was a spacious hall with beds for students of the construction platoon and a small room for its two girls. 
Then there followed a one-story stoker-house and after it the vast grounds of Auto-Depot 4 behind a high red brick wall.
There were garages, a canteen, and many other buildings, some of which hadn’t yet been completed, and in the middle of the grounds a wide and deep foundation pit.

Steel wires were stretched over the pit, along and across.
Under the intersections of the stretched wires, our platoon had to collect the plank formworks and fill them with concrete to make the ‘glasses' for insertion of support columns. 
But all that in the future and for the beginning there were shovels and – ‘take as much as you can, throw as far as you’re able’.
Everything was so nostalgic familiar.
And only the uniform was different.

After a working day, the stoker-’chemists’, Yura and Tomato opened the cock inside their stoker-house and from the pipe outside (high up in the wall) gushed a broad jet of water.
You could stand under the jet and get a shower.
The water was chilly, of course, but it was a summer season...

A week later the platoon Commander called a general meeting.
The agenda of one issue – feeding of the platoon’s contingent, because the food in the canteen was just a…

(...well, I don’t know, the same havvage as anywhere else…)

The meeting approved – to feed on our own resources which to be obtained for money taken by the Commander from the Auto-Depot foreman in advance on account of our future labor victories. 
From now on the girls were not only paramedics but also cooks. 
Each evening, as it got dark, in twos or threes we went on a raid on the potato field of the nearby collective farm.
Well, sweeping anything looking ripe on the way too.

‘A furious construction platoon
Is like to a fire in the steppe!..’

The students were complimenting the cooking of the girls. 
I don’t know; well, on the whole – yes, hotter than in the canteen, but otherwise a havvage as anywhere else.

A couple of times we went to dances in the village of Ivkovtsy by the truck water-tanker of a young driver. 
The girls in the cab, the rest where they could grab a hold of the iron cistern of the truck.
We danced to the hits of Leshchenko: 

‘From the fields, the sad mood goes away, 
The anxiety goes from the soul,
And the vistas wide unfold ahead...’

After the dances with a whizz through the breeze, hugging the steely cistern…

Once we went for the midday break and meal in Ladan.
In English ‘ladan’ means ‘incense’ with all connotations to it.
But I also had a meaningful image – a curly beard, the hair grown below the ears, and a twisted bandage tied around the head to keep the hair from falling over the eyes.
You wouldn't make it out at a glance whether it's an excommunicated priest or Rambo from black and white photos. 

But when in the local noshery Rambo demanded a bottle of white be served in a beer glass everything fell in place – a drunkard from Auto-Depot 4! 

We returned from Ladan to our bedroom where Sasha Chalov, a third-year student from the English Department came from Pryluky where he lived.
And he came not alone but with his friend and a briefcase full of ammunition.
‘The Sun in the Tumbler!’
After all, they learned to produce full of poetry stickers in our country!

Adding the ‘Sun' on top of berry&fruit from Ladan I felt a need to catch my breath. 
I wanted to lie in the bushes of the forest belt, but would such friends allow you to breathe?
Sasha and his chum tore me from our mutual mother earth and dragged to the second floor and dropped on the bed.
Some fucking lot of help it was!
I had to puke from the second floor like that jet from the wall of the stoker-house...

Actually, they came to say they needed a bass guitarist for ‘doing trash' at weddings in the city of Pryluky. 
We served two weddings at weekends but both for free because the happy couples were relatives of Sasha’s chum.
It turned out a job for grub.
So to the second wedding, I took three students from the Physics and Mathematics Department along with me, like, they were sound engineers. 

The handle of ‘Tomato’ suited the stoker-‘chemist’ perfectly because his face had red skin and his hair was of natural orange color.
He was the most joyful ‘chemist’ in the world.
Had I his skills at sharping cards I’d also walk my life smiling.
He shuffled the deck and dealt hands with eight tricks in hearts for himself.
Even fully aware that he was stacking the deck you could not follow how. 

In the excavated foundation pit we worked incompetently but with enthusiasm, until at the end of the month, the foreman presented the work orders for our labor. 
By his calculations, after deduction of the paid advance, our payment per worker equaled to the student monthly scholarship of 45 rubles. 
At that moment Auto-Depot 4 ran out of nails and we had nothing to collect the formworks with.

The enthusiasm dried up and we still had ahead ten days of sitting without the job. 
In that period our food expenses would eat away our earnings. 

The platoon sent a negotiating group for talks with the director of Auto-Depot 4.
The delegation consisted of me and one of two girls, the blonde one. 
She did not understand a fig either in construction works or nails for carpentering but she was blonde which imparts the right impulse to the process of any negotiations.

The chief engineers said that the director was not around, he was harvesting the crops in the fields of the patronized collective farm.
The good news was that a truck with spare parts was leaving soon for the harvesting field camp, which could also take us there. 
If there were no blondes in the delegation he would hardly have thought of mentioning the truck which he himself was driving while the blonde was sitting in the cab between him and me. 

I was surprised at his ability to recognize the Auto-Depot 4 vehicles on the highway long before their number plates were discernible.
The chief engineer explained that he was recognizing them by their horns and asked if I knew Tshombe. 

Of course, I knew Tshombe who machine-gunned Patrice Lumumba when I was still a pioneer.
However, I could not figure out any connection between the trucks rushing in the opposite direction along the sunlit highway and the dictator from I could not remember which African country because I was still a pioneer then.
So I denied any acquaintance and said no, I did not know him.

The chief engineer said that Tshombe was Auto-Depot 4 director to whom we were traveling now.
This Tshombe of a director ordered the radiators of all the vehicles in Auto-Depot 4 to be marked with white paint in the form of a large Roman 'five'. 
The marks were visible from afar and, in the opinion of the drivers, resembled horns. 
The drivers cursed Tshombe’s meanness because such marks added complexity to going on their contingent runs.
However, the director had been Tshombe even before the Depot's vehicles acquired the horns... 

The director was not in the field camp of four big trailers.
They said he was reaping another field.
The chief engineer with the spare parts and the blonde remained by the trailers and I went to Tshombe. 

The brand new water tanker of the UAZ brand was driven by a ten-year boy, the son of the director.

A brown harvester with white inscription ‘Niva’ on its side was encircling a yellow hot field in the cloud of thick dust.
I went to meet it but it rumbled by and I have to run after and jump on the short ladder that led to the inclined cab of the combine.
The harvester roared and pounded on in its ride through the dust 
For the first time in my life I had climbed aboard such a juggernaut but everything went on intuitively – that’s the ladder, that’s the door.
 
In the narrow cabin, a man in a cap sat with his back to me and watched through the glass of the front wall how his combine fell and drew in thick ears of wheat. 
I slammed the door, cutting off the knock in the bunker behind my back and also stared at the rows of crawling ears while I reported to the top of his cap that our platoon was sitting around, the nails had run out and we wouldn’t earn anything.
Under the rumble of the engine, the ears twitched, fell on a wide rotating shaft and flowed upward in shredded bunches. 

The director did not turn around and answered that he would see what could be done and let the chief engineer come to him. 
I got out of the cab into the dust from the bunker, went down the ladder and jumped off on the run. 
I saw neither the face nor the skin color of the man I had been talking to, but I felt that some dictators were worthy of respect...

In the trailer with a long table under the oilcloth, there was the midday meal in progress and we were fed too. 
Such a dinner does not fall under the name of havvage it was a real grub.

The cook in his stained but otherwise white jacket put half a dipper of sore cream in a huge enamel bowl and filled it with red steaming borshch.
A big piece of freshly boiled meat was put on top.
Having eaten all of that, I got filled to the brim.

Then the cook served golden balls of fried young potatoes with dill and meat sauce.
Very tasty, but having absolutely no room for the second course I finished it off simply out of principle.

The compote seemed a glut excess, but, gradually, I poured it in too.
With thanks for the treat, I rose and very carefully went down the steps of the front porch. 
When on the ground I unbuckled my belt and with the gait of dividers proceeded to the garden adjoining the field.

There I neatly laid me down on an armful of dry hay under an apple tree in the hope that maybe I somehow would not burst.
And so it happened!
By the time the blonde came into the garden I felt normal.

She sat under the same apple tree, leaned her back on the trunk and smiled at me her inviting sweet smile.
I was amazed by the exact coincidence of circumstances – a garden around her and me under the apple tree, and only the serpent was skipping the picture.
And with tender emotion, I started to think of Eera and to be proud of my being faithful to her. 
Because of I restrained myself from falling in the usual groove with the blonde and did not go with the flow despite all so ingratiating conditions created for the purpose – the bed of hay in the apple-tree shade in the Garden of Eden.

The following morning I, the chief engineer and a long tape measure were marking out where to lay the wall of two inspection holes in the boxes under the construction. 
Tshombe had come up with something to keep us busy with.

A couple of days before the completion of the term at the construction platoon, Sasha Chalov popped up at the Auto-Depot 4 on no particular purpose just to drink the sun in the tumbler.
Giving a light shake to his briefcase he, as was his custom, recited his favorite quatrain:

‘One won’t sound at all
And two won’t jingle this way
When people of such quality
Live in the Soviet land!’

From the poetry standpoint, it was a rather poor and lousy piece of it yet, on the whole, containing an optimistically inspiring message.

The stoker-’chemists’ helped to sort out with the contents of the portfolio, which made one bottle for a snout and, after the consumption, Sasha Chalov left.

It was already late so Tomato and Yura also steered to their stoker-house, but on the way, they knocked on the door of the girls' room. 
It happened to be locked.
They knocked again and then recollecting their happy school days and themselves – adolescent hooligans – they started cutting capers around the locked door.
They burnt shreds of paper and shoved them under the door.
The girls defended themselves from inside with the water from their kettle. 

In the background was I lying on my bed and producing a soundtrack of hue and cry. 
A sudden rage against the whole female gender broke out in me, like, because of them all was so awry and so boring that I myself did not know what I needed.
So I lay there yelling most disgusting things.

If the door were open from the very beginning the ‘chemists’ would simply come in and go out, but now they were burning with hunting ardor.

Sure thing, staying under the sword of Damocles of being sent back to the zone they were not going to aggravate the situation, they were just having fun.

However, the poor girls in the besieged room were not up to all these logical operations or seeing any fun at all when a pair of convicts were attacking their door under my instigating idiotic yells from the common bedroom:
‘Bitches! Wolf whores!’
Finally, one of the guys from their course came to my bed and said that was not right. 
I shouted to the stokers that that was enough and Tomato with Yura immediately disappeared. 
The ‘chemists’ had no problems with the logic.

The next morning I knocked on the door of the girls' room. 
It was not locked.
I entered and apologized for the previous night.
‘Afraid of getting kicked out from the institute?’ asked the one with the brown hair.
Hardly would she believe that I was just ashamed.
Even less I could bring it over that I myself did not know whether I was afraid or wanted to be sent down from it.

(...looking back brings not too much fun, because of too often temptation to spit in your own face.
However, the truth remains truth only when it's unvarnished and all that shit is also me…) 

Since I earned some kopecks at the student construction platoon, I bought a doll for Lenochka.
Of course, I wouldn't be smart enough to do it but the radio station Mayak for at least thrice a day aired the most popular hit of the season: 

‘Daddy present me,
Daddy present me,
Daddy present me
With a doll!’

And during a day that hit would get you someplace or another and start to twirl on and on in the brains even without the radio around until – click! – hey, that’s an idea!
So I went to Department Store to buy a doll, but there were no dolls.

It wouldn’t be right to always find faults with the era of shortages.
It’s not era’s fault if ideas reach the retarded dolt belatedly.
So I had to buy a dog.
Also the most expensive and of the biggest size, no less than a meter tall, in his trousers and a shirt.
The same, practically, doll, only with a canine head...

Lenochka grew a healthy child and she attended the big kindergarten ‘Sunny’ not too far from home, in the apple orchard of May Day Street.

All September I was taking her to ‘Sunny' and coming after her at the end of the day because those who worked at the student construction platoon were released from the patronizing assistance to collective farms. 
I shaved my beard but left the hair long.
Once I and my brother went to dances together.
Sasha Basha had already replaced the Spitzes at the Loony dance-floor.

My brother had served his two years in the army at the Baikonur cosmodrome and for that, he lost any chance of going out of the country for twenty years. 
Even visiting the resorts of socialist Bulgaria became impossible, what if he suddenly would disclose there that on Baikonur, besides the astronauts, all kinds of test ballistic missiles were launched on a weekly basis?

When we went to the Loony I, besides the long hair, wore sunglasses with ‘mona-Lisa' rim. 
You don't need sunglasses in the evening, but the thin golden ‘mona-Lisa' rim was considered the pop symbol of a dude of fashion. 
Just like the jeans that were losing blue dye of their fabric with wear.
Such jeans were pushed over for 120-150 rubles, which was more than an average workman salary.
The jeans had been trafficking into Konotop by dark-skinned Algerians who studied at the Engineering Technical School. 

Those Algerians were so naive.
‘He said-a come-a go out and talk-a. I come-a out, he kick-a me a kick. Why-a?' 
But for all their naivety they kept the price of jeans high. 

And my jeans were for just 30 rubles and that they looked.
Some Brazilian crap never fading with washing, nothing like Lyalka’s ‘Levi’s’.
Therefore, although it’s hard to see through sunglasses in the evening, they justified themselves at dances, covering the misery in jeans.

To the dance-floor, we arrived after the break when it was filled with the crowd to the utmost. 
My brother went looking for his girlfriend and I pulled up nearby the stage and remained there listening.
Basha’s guitarist, Marik, was good at solo breaks.
Then some buster came up and stared at me.
Well, understandable – such a hippy-long hair, the 'mona-Lisa', and the metropolitan air. 
So he stared for a while and got lost.
I stood where I was and in a couple of minutes–good evening to your hutta!–the same buster popped up but already with his buddy. 
And they approached me and, synchronously so, rocked back and–lo!–two fists flew into me.

I parried them with my shoulder but the collective impact of the double blow felled me and I, like, flew into another space.
I mean that – a completely another dimension, as if under the water.
The sound of the dances instantly turned off and I flew on, or rather, I kept spinning along the concrete floor.
And from all the sides legs were rushing towards me all too eager to kick.
And those legs, for some reason, were not whole but sort of cutouts, just from feet up to knees.
So they whizzed by from here and there only soundlessly.
But missed kicking.
I yanked me up and jumped on the bench by the circular fence with my back to the pipes.
Then the sound came back.
The girls’ shrieking and Basha’s into the microphone:
‘Friends, please, observe...’
And before the bench a group of guys facing me and one of them, such hefty, shouts:
‘Who’re you? Who’re you? Take off your glasses!!’
I pulled the ‘mona-Lisa’ off and someone shouted:
‘From the Orpheuses!’
They turned out to be guys from the Settlement, although I did not even know them.
They took me in a tight circle and escorted out of the dance-floor and went back at once to the general sorting out.
On that day the guys from the Depot Street tried to prove that Loony was their territory.

At the exit from the park, I met my brother, one his brow was broken. 
We had to go to the Station for him to wash the blood off under the tap in the men’s room...

Seeing the most conspicuous things is the hardest of tasks.
I had been raiding grass plantations as far as the Kandybino itself while in the neighbor’s garden, right over the fence there grew a dense corpse of cannabis.
That’s what a limited outlook means.
I was looking into the distance and couldn’t see under my very nose.
 The situation called for a restoration of the historical justice.

I did it the next night and to cover the tracks threw the grass from the neighbor’s garden over his fence to the next lane and then round the corner to our wicket and up to the shed’s attic.
Sampling proved that the quality was simply excellent.
I shared some of the booties with Lyalka for him to get high and feel that not for nothing he was warming me up in those two years...

You strike a lode and there comes another.
In Nezhin, in the plot by an inconspicuous hutta in the Count’s Park across the Leninist Komsomol cinema there stood five ample bushes of the grass without any fencing whatsoever.
No saint would pass by and withstand the temptation.
But then a serious problem arose how to store the harvest?
To keep it under the bed in Hosty?
Very funny indeed.

I walked around the hostel looking for a suitable nook but in vain. 
Then in the washroom on the fourth floor, I saw a desk with a drawer. 
I did not know how it came to be there or for how long it would stay in the washroom, but being desperate to find any better place (I couldn't just leave the weed in the park with the rains setting in, couldn't I?) I just heaped it in the drawer. 
As a precaution, I turned the desk around and pushed it against the wall so that no one would horse around.
Then, as necessary, I was visiting the washroom to pinch off the grass for a day or two of consumption...

My course-mates returned from the collective farm they patronized in a complete shock.
So tacitly deep in thoughts about the meaning and aim of life.
That is, whether or not they understood those issues correctly?

It turned out that during the patronizing assistance works two of local guys had a knife fight.
Because of whom?
Because of Tanya that was studying in my group.

A year before those ruthless bitches of my group-mates asked me to pretend that I fell in love with her.
Just for fun because she was so inarticulate and unattractive.
And I—the stupid moose—was quick to do what asked.

‘Tanya! I love you with all of the depth! And what is your mutual feeling?’
For two days I pestered her at the break until she asked to leave her alone.
It looked like she was ready to cry.
I got ashamed and pissed off.

Well, now, how do you like it, ladies?
Who was chosen by the guys as the prize of their berserk passion?

That’s why the girls were following her with the looks full of respect and envy.
And she walked the corridors so solemn and thoughtful as if she got it something about herself which she could never expect.
And her glances at me became not as negating as they used to be.
What if I had not been just sporting last year?
Thank you, dagger guys, for the alibi...

But I still kept bothered with the incorrect way of storing the grass in the desk drawer.
Anyone with advanced notions would at once get the smell in the washroom. 
Then again, the Phys-Mat Department students could ask themselves the unnecessary question: why did I start so frequently visit the washroom on their floor? 
So with the first snow in November I took it out to transfer to another place of storage.
My plan was to hide it in the dormer on the Old Building’s roof because I saw a well-welded ladder going there from the backyard...

Late in the evening Slavic, Twoic, and Eera accompanied me to the Old Building's backyard like being a state commission at the launch of a manned spaceship from the site at Baikonur. 
I gave my coat and hat to Eera, thrust the package with the grass under my shirt and started. 

The first minutes of the ladder-lift went in normal mode.
The vibration of the construction parts did not exceed the limits but only the iron rungs were icy cold and the lift was endless.
At the times of Gogol, they built the floors two-three times taller than presently. 

At the entering the roof, there cropped up unforeseen problems. 
The ladder did not reach the roof itself ending under the eaves.
It was necessary to clutch the tinplate and go over its edge onto the roof.

Of that moment I recollect the uncompromisingly dark night around.
There were three of us – the tin, the darkness and I...
The roof itself was quite slippery although not too steep
I had to move on stepping onto the standing seams of the sheet blocks.
When I got to the dormer its window turned out to be tightly sealed with thick planks nailed from within.
Thank you for your visit.

On the way back I suddenly slipped when nearing the place where I had to get over the tin roof edge but I did not fall, straightened up and said through the clenched teeth:
‘Impressing the public, you bastard?’

Then I went down on all fours, dangled my legs over the edge and groped with my feet for the ladder rung.
On the way down I was mortified at the thought that it wouldn’t be bad if I just fell but if on someone from the commission?

(...certain thoughts are better never to be thought at all…)

And again I kicked in a door.
What is remarkable it was the same one.
Only Ilya Lipes did not live in that room anymore. 
It was inhabited by the current four-year students and Vitya Kononevich among them who thoughtlessly asked Zhora Ilchenko for ‘The Godfather’ book together with the dictionary by Hornby imported from India.

What insignificant, at first glance, and trivial things might cause a jolt in the life flow!
Say, you ask Zhora to lend you ‘The Godfather' for a month or so and then you come to the hostel and see the door of your room has got kicked in. 

By the way, this time no shaky finger were observed.
The skills get formed really quickly.
Perhaps, the fact that I was working not for Veerich but for myself had its effect.

‘The Godfather’ novel by Mario Puzo was stolen not out of idle curiosity (would or wouldn’t my finger start shaking?), neither for upgrading my door-kick-in skills, but just to translate it in Russian.

The novel, as also its author, happened to be rather thick, about four hundred pages.
Taking into consideration the way it had got to my hands, Konotop was a more suitable place for plunging into the translation work.
It took several months of intent labor to render the book from the Penguin Publishing House into a pile of thick numbered notebooks written with my handwriting, in different hues of ink, in Russian.
I passed the whole bunch to Lyalka and his wife Valentina for reading but of the subsequent movements and general fate of the rendered Godfather I am aware no more than of that of the Jaws, also rendered from English.

In the course of the work, about halfway through towards the completion, my father cooperated by sharing his critical remarks.

In the original, there was a description of a party in the Hollywood club designed and equipped for the recreation of movie stars. 
I had difficulties with translating the American English term ‘blowjob’ into Russian.
The descriptive options seemed too long for me while the shorter ones looked outrageously obscene.
 When in labor pains, I tore an unsuccessful attempt at translation out of the notebook and shoved it into the stove to be used for kindling.

In the evening my father opened the cast-iron door to fill the stove firebox with wood, took out the crumpled sheet of paper and on reading through its contents asked:
‘What fucking hooey is this?’

I did not challenge his estimation for two reasons.
Firstly, I knew that passages perceived in the form of the printed text as eroticism do look a vulgar porn when presented in handwriting.
It suffices to recall the handwritten story passing in a thin notebook from hands to hands of the senior students at Konotop school 13. 
The story contained a passage running as follows ‘...she threw her legs in fishnet lace up over his shoulders...’
I do not know why but I had immediately and inseparably associated those fishnet legs with the Eiffel Tower.
It’s not an easy task to defend erotica with the Eiffel Tower crushing poor guy’s shoulders.
On the other hand, it's hard to predict how those same legs would have affected me were they met in an orderly line of a typographic set. 
People judge by appearances.

Secondly, I always respected the subtle literary instinct of my father.
Thus, from the newspaper ‘Trud’ he read only the TV program and giving the other headings a brief glance announced the exhaustive conclusion:
‘Neither rhyme nor reason – kiss a flea in the brick.' 
And he never mistook.
Crisp and to the point.

Besides, he possessed some amazing linguistic ingenuity.
Perhaps, because of his Ryazan roots.
The land of Ryazan always lay at the crossroads of language contacts.

Well, for example.
With his gray brows taunted above the plastic rim of his glasses, he's busy with some kind of handwork at the kitchen table. 
Inserting some hooey into another hooey.
I pass between the table and the stove from the door to the window, then from the window to the door.
Without taking his eyes from the hooeys in his hands the father says:
‘Why trorting?’
No dictionary has got the word.
But what a juicy verb!
How much of elastic plasticity it contains!
The most accurate grasp of the action’s essence and the state of the actor.
And most importantly, the word got born spontaneously, just now, while this flicking hooey doesn’t want to enter into the other flicking one.
‘Who'd not trort? The treppa's pibzed already!’
Both workpieces drop from his hands on the table. 
A long look over the rim of his glasses.
Then he says:
‘Pfui!’

And here, by the way, lies the complete explanation of the 'fathers-and-children' problem – they produce the likes of themselves and then say ‘pfui!’

(...coming back to ‘The Godfather’.
Unfortunately, there remained no writers in the American literature – Salinger, Carver, Pearson and the list is at its end.
The rest are scribbling with their both eyes on Hollywood buying their production.
Compilers of cartoon stories and soap opera dialogues.

Look at the Briton Maugham, the very first paragraph in a story by him is a chord, a fugue tuning up.
In the first paragraph, among the surface details, he scatters nodules, which will develop into the further narrative and the denouement that echoes the first paragraph.
That’s a real craftsmanship.
Exactly what the Hollywood jackleg daysmen are lacking.
My father would say:
‘Pfui!’

Puzo is the role model from the same and for the same Hollywood writers.
He was the first to get a six-figure sum of dollars for his creation, the accountancy pathfinder, but ‘The Godfather’ of his suffers from the infirmity common to all the action bestsellers: while the protagonists fight for their survival in the unfavorable environment of hostile mafia clans, you can still read it, but with the start of the elephant distribution, that is methodical extermination of bad guys who were stupid enough to give a chance to their future killers, the interest dwindles rapidly and soon evaporates.
The same trouble as with the 19th song in the Odyssey, when the hero returns home from his wanderings and whacks the suitors of his wife one by one with aesthetic relishing of the details in what manner the assholes’ brains were smashed of guts ripped out.
I couldn't finish reading the song even in a good Ukrainian translation, not because of squeamishness but simply got bored…) 

I noticed him a fraction of second sooner than he saw me.
With our stares merged we were nearing each other along the sidewalk by the building of the Trade Union of the Railroad Distance. 
Both of us knew that only one would survive.
Or no one.
With my lateral sight, I marked the figures of rare passers-by scared and careful to avoid the space on one line between him and me. 
Steadily, inexorably we were shortening the line. 
Step by step.
The distance dwindled rendering the forthcoming duel inescapably lethal.
His hand darted to his right hip but no sooner than his palm touched the handle of his Smith & Wesson my Colt erupted in a series of shots fused into a thundering staccato. 
If you are going to survive in Konotop you have to swing up your gun first. 
His hands flushed up to his bullet-riddled chest. 
He staggered and crouched over a line of short shorn bushes of the lawn upon which he had to fall the next moment.

I put my Colt back in the holster, he straightened up and we embraced.
‘Kuba!’
‘Gray!’

The passers-by were getting along past us.
Yes, that’s him – Kuba.
Grinning with the gold which has replaced his teeth lost in the bars of faraway ports of oversea wanderings, but this is Kuba. 
‘How do you?’
It’s strange that everybody changes—they grow fat, they grow bald—but for your friends.
Once your eyes contact that’s enough, you no longer see scars, or false teeth or any other distracting things.
You see you friend Kuba with whom you have had bike rides to the Kandybino or the Seim, attended the Children Sector, rode tram 'sausage'.
It just that now Kuba has something to tell about the life of seamen plowing the World Ocean.

We are sitting at Kuba’s.
His old folks are at work but there we have three eggs in the frying pan on the table by the three-liter jar with transparent, lethally powerful moonshine where the lemon peels float not below the middle.
We drink, eat and listen to the stories of Kuba the Seafarer.

Once he was late after the vacation and his ship sailed away.
They assigned him to a self-propelled barge for about a month until some suitable ship turned up.
The crew consisted of him alone, but he strictly kept the maritime regulations on the barge moored at the far wharf at the mouth of the river. 
Standing on the bridge he shouted loudly:
‘Cast off!’
And he ran from the bridge to the wharf and removed the lines from the bitts.
Then he jumped back to command and execute ‘Slow Astern!’

Well done!
Let them know ours! 
Up the elbows!

And in foreign ports, there are special houses for seamen recreation. 
Equipped like a luxury hotel, with a restaurant, rooms, a swimming pool.
So with Soviet seamen diving into the pool there at once pop up some crimson spots in the water around them.
Abroad, they got advanced and add some chemicals to the water and it turns crimson from urine.
Well, and you know the habit of ours, the first thing after plunging into water is to take a leak… 
So they have to drain the pool and fill it again and the Germans sit for an hour at the tables over their beer and wait.
‘Rusishe Schweinen!’
They themselves are pigs. Fascists unwhacked!
Up the elbows!

In Hong Kong, it was, or maybe Thailand. 
Ours got moored, went to the city and then they were coming back to the pier. 
There was a team of dockers, so skinny them all because they live on just rice and seafood. 
Our boatswain was a hero, two meters tall, he grabbed one of the dockers by his collar and lifted up in the air like a kitten. 
‘Yea, bro. Slaving all your life, eh? Not right.’
He put him back and went on.
So that yellow did not understand the brotherly solidarity and did not appreciate the Slavic breadth of soul.
He ran ahead, jumped into the air—ya!—and kicked the boatswain into the nose. 
Then ours had a whole hour to water the boatswain on the pier to bring him back to life. 
And dat's rightee! 
Here’s to Bruce Lee!
Up the!

No, Kuba ain’t gonna get married at all.
But they all are fucking sluts.
A ship in the roadstead ready for sailing off.
The captain’s wife comes up on a towboat to kiss him goodbye.
Happy voyage, dear!
Coming back to the harbor she’s fucking the helmsman and two mechanics in turn in the wheelhouse.
For freedom!
For whores!
Up-p-p!

And it’s difficult to smuggle goods from abroad.
Any ship’s zampolit has at least two finks among the crew.
‘You mean, there are zampolits on ships?!’
‘That’s the rule.’
‘I’d better stay a land rat then!’
T’s rightee!
For rats!
U-u-up!

But I remembered clearly that I was going to the drugstore because my mother asked to bring her somewhat medicine before I go to Nezhin.
Therefore, I most warmly said goodbye to Kuba the Sea Dog although the lemon peels were not yet scraping along the bottom of the three-liter jar and in the frying pan were glittering, here and there, some spots of sunflower not wiped out dry with bread. 
‘No! No! I know! All's gonna be nyshtyak' 

After the Under-Overpass, I boarded a tram to the center. 
I clearly got off it at the Department Store and went around its corner to the drugstore where, by my mother's lead, they sold the needed medicine. 
I entered the glass door, reached the glass partition and, to the question of the woman in white, breathed the air in preparing to answer when I suddenly realized that even if I could remember the name of the medication then pronouncing it or anything at all was a deed beyond the humanly possible.
With bitter regret I turned around, exhaled and went out brokenly.

Nevertheless, I somehow managed to cross the Peace Square before realizing that I was done in beyond all bounds and switched to the guidance of the guardian angel. 
He steered me into the yard of a five-story apartment block, chose the proper entrance and took care that I did not crash down the dark stairs in an unfamiliar basement. 
Then he led me along an endless cemented corridor to the place where the scattered light from the opening to the outside pit outlined a mesh bed frame leaned against the wall.
It remained only to lower it to the floor and fall onto it.
The sheepskin coat and the hat served as a sleeping bag.

I woke up in a stiff state but still managed to get to the last train to Nezhin.
The next weekend I again volunteered to go to the drugstore after the medicine if my mother reminded me its name but she said no, it was not necessary any longer... 

There was a New Year dancing party held in the foyer of the New Building.
Eera and I were dancing there and some teacher from the Biology Department got delighted and told us that we were created for each other.
It’s nice to hear such things especially from a specialist versed in species.

But then my jeans zipper went burst.
The length of my sweater was not enough to hide the hole.
So I tried to fasten the sweater hem to the jean’s fly with the safety pin lent me by Slavic.
It did not solve the issue because the pinched down sweater resembled a leotard for girls and I felt anxious that the pin would go open and prick into the right or the left ball if not in the dick.
I had to go to Hosty and change my jeans.

Normally, I didn't keep spare clothes in my room changing in Konotop at weekends.
However, that was a special occasion and I had brought elegant jeans for dancing at the party.
Now I changed back into shabbier, but sturdier ones.

Upon returning to the foyer I found Eera in an eager conversation with some young man.
I did not like him right away, despite the fact that he was some of her old acquaintances.
Probably, I couldn’t hide my dislike towards him and it got reflected.
The confrontation did not go over to active hostilities but the voice timbers acquired menacing pitch. 

At some point, I got distracted from the jackass and caught a glimpse of Eera which deeply amazed me. 
She blossomed with happiness.
Never have I ever seen so much joy in her eyes.

On the way to her home, she kept disparaging the incorrectness of my reaction to an absolutely normal situation and I half-heartedly defended myself busy with storing in my head the new discovery. 

(…a woman is a female bitch for which the moment of the highest bliss is when two males are going to lock their horns to get her.
For her, the prize she-mate.
That’s it.
You are slaving like a Pygmalion turning a statue into living flesh, plowing like Papa Carlo, and then someone else comes to enjoy the ready. 
Where’s the f-f.. flicking justice?..)

The New Year Eera met at the Hosty.
Before her arrival, I served a romantic table for two and then suddenly decided to prepare a surprise for her, or rather a New Year gift...

I had been always taught to think that the longer, the better.
That means that duration of having sex indicates the action's quality. 

The human race invented quite a few ways to improve the quality. 
The simplest one is to kill a glass or two, I mean the standard Russian glass of 250 ml.
However, stepping on that path you need the right snack.
Prosper Merimé, for example, highly recommends soup of cock combs for this particular purpose.
I did not even have lard.

The circumstances called for going another way and seeking other means. 
The personal experience of the brute facts of life insistingly prompted that of two go-rounds the second having sex was always longer.
I had no other choice but having a pre-emptive sex.
Very conveniently, Plyama was running along the corridor, hither and thither.

I did not start to explain her the whole background of my unexpected interest in her or clarify that I needed her solely for the purposes of technical assistance.
Although such frankness would not hurt her in any way.
She had seen much more than I could imagine in the wildest dreams before she had to transfer to Nezhin Pedagogical Institute from the University of Kiev to avoid being sent down for over-grossly unleashed fucking. 
Maybe there were other reasons too because she casually mentioned that her husband did not wear anything under his jeans at all.
Well, I don’t know, for me, an unspoiled guy from the Plant Settlement, all that was a bit too complicated...

The technical assistance was applied in a neutral, of course, room and orogenitally but, alas, to no avail.
Perhaps, because of her warning not to crumple her breasts, she did not have erogenous zones there at all. 
And even the ringlets of her hair the color of the raven’s wing and the glasses which she never took off were of no help.

But what a subtle plan it had been!
And what a willingness for selfless self-sacrifice!
Really, when you think of it.
What can be a more vivid prove of love and care than providing a blowjob for Plyama, who had no idea where those f-f.. fugitive erogenous zones of hers were at all. 

But I did not tell Eera what I had to undergo to make her feel good.
I have never been in the habit of emphasizing my positive aspects or advertising my noble deeds...

Later on, that New Year night, when Eera and I sat up at the table again wrapped in bed sheets like Romans in togas, Plyama walked by the door opened to the corridor. 
Out there, noisily and joyfully, those who met the New Year in the hostel congratulated each other.
Plyama politely knocked on the door jamb, was invited to the table, treated to wine and allowed to ask Eera about her life circumstances.

Eera started to drive a fool to her as if she was a married woman but her husband being a geologist seldom came home. 
Plyama, who had recently moved from Kiev to Nezhin, believed everything making Eera and me laugh immoderately.
The arrogant, naive Romans in loose togas, we were having the fun of the gullible Plyama not knowing that any jest is the truth which has simply not come yet to be fulfilled... 

The winter examination session ended and Eera and I visited Borzna for the wedding of her girlfriend Vera and a solid groom in the rank of major.
Unlike to the first wedding I experienced in Borzna, the party was not at home but in the large cafe-canteen on the main square of the district center and lasted for two days.
After the first day, Eera and I spent the night in a small hutta among the snow-covered vegetable gardens on the outskirts. 

The hutta owner, a distant relative of Vera, was told that Eera and I were a newlywed married couple and she after having her fill at the wedding table went to stay for the night at some other relative’s because her hutta consisted of just one room filled with a whitewashed oven, a table, and a bed.

The bed stood by the wide window sill crossed with contrasting black shadows from the frame under the bright full moon outside setting on gleam the glass of the empty three-liter jar left on the same sill.
I liked everything there, and the earth floor made of firm washed down clay, and the bed with boards instead of a mesh, and the mattress unevenly stuffed with hay...

It is unlikely that the mistress believed in our being a husband and wife, during the wedding feast I a couple of times caught her both sneering and encouraging gaze from behind the table where she sat among the elderly women in formal black padded jackets or black plush coats with thick plaid kerchiefs spread over their shoulders...

We threw our clothes off on a chair and a stool and ascended to the matrimonial bed as it was a hundred and two hundred years before in the same huttas lost among the same snowdrifts.
The moon reluctantly rose up from the window frame and could no longer follow the merrymaking couple of newlyweds pressing hay at the different ends of the bed grown into the earth floor of the ancient hutta...

On the second day, Eera got silly jealous when a local beauty summoned me from the wedding hall. 
I did not really get it what’s what when Vera’s brother, Mozart by his handle, retold the unintelligible message.
Leaving the cafe-canteen I went to the backyard where a beautiful, in general, female was staging a pathetic hysteria on trampled snow in the hands of two girlfriends, all the trinity in light dresses. 
A group of young spectators who came out into the air crowded by with exhortations to her and advises to the girls pinioning her.
Without the slightest participation in the happening I turned to go and met the unforgiving stare of Eera. 
At the table, I had a hard time convincing her that I had nothing to do with the tipsy girl's vagaries. 

I was supported by an ample-bodied Valentina sitting next to Eera, a female of most remarkable physique.
Further on was seated an insignificant by her mighty forms Armenian.
His Armenian identity was revealed when he was giving us a ride in the twilight.

On the street leading to the Moscow highway, the big Valentina told him to slow down and left the Zhiguli to yell at Tolik, her fifth-grader son. 
The boy was replying to his mother in pure Ukrainian and I felt somehow knocked out of a rut by the winter snow around sharply contrasting with his Negro face.

Later, Eera told me that Valentina had born Tolik after working as a waitress in Kiev, or may be found that job after the delivery, I'm not sure on that point. 

Valentina's current life partner of an Armenian was not messing around with the instance of upbringing. 
We rode along the highway and in a couple of kilometers stopped on the roadside snow.
The driver turned on the tape-recorder and took out a bottle of foil-necked champagne.

(...the beauty of Armenian music does not open to listeners right away.
At that time it was still incomprehensible to me but I kept patient – he, who gives a ride, orders the music…)

A patrol car stopped on the road and two militiamen in greatcoats and, despite the winter, forage caps approached the Zhiguli.
The Armenian stepped out to negotiate and make it clear that everything was safe.

In the meantime, Valentina started to resent that I and Eera were staying in so shabby a hutta and undertook to bring her indignation to the bride’s parents, who were some kind of her relatives.
As a result, the second night we spent in a large, well-equipped hutta in the well-to-do part of Borzna.

The moon could peep into our room there, only a dim reflection of the moonlight made its way to us through the glazed door of the adjacent veranda.
The bed frame was too creaky so the mattress had to be thrown on the painted floorboards.
Not bad, in general, but I liked it batter in the shabby hutta...

We were taken to Nezhin by the Armenian.
Along the way, I for some reason was thinking about Tolik, the Negro boy. 
Old women in Borzna were dropping their jaws and crossing themselves behind his back.
How does it feel that you are not like anyone else?

(...Pushkin's grandfather was an unalloyed Ethiopian, but at least in his childhood, he had seen normal people…) 

When we got out of the Zhiguli by the hostel, the Armenian asked me to tarry a second and when Eera went along he inquired if I knew the address of the beauty with theatrical traits.
I neither knew nor wanted to know it.

Eera and I went to the room on the third floor and after half hour of rolling on a more habitual bed frame, she said she felt something she had never experienced before. 
Well, thank you!
So it was not in vain, putting myself out all that year and a half. 
Or was it that she had just pitied me?.

As mentioned already, in February I went to the hospital for more than a week because of my adherence to principles.
After a week of treatment, my sister Natasha found me there. 
In the whole Decemberists Street in Konotop, there was just one phone in the hutta at number 26.
I did not know their number and even if I did, I probably wouldn’t call.
One and a half weeks are not two years.

I left the wardroom with Natasha and at the end of the corridor, we went down one flight of the stairs leading to the basement. 
She took out her filter cigarettes, I stuffed a joint in a Belomor-Canal and we mixed our smokes.
‘Well, and how are you?’asked my sister after I reported how Pill went crazy.
‘Well, and I also have Eera,’ said I and started to convince my sister that Eera was not like everyone else, not at all.
‘Well, well,’ replied Natasha indefinitely...

When I was discharged, I suddenly felt that too much strength had been given to the struggle for the just cause.
On the way to the hostel, I even had to untie the ear-flaps of my rabbit fur hat and let them loose. 
In the most severe frost I never did so and only rubbed my ears against the turned up collar of the sheepskin coat and demanded from the saleswoman at the station stand to sell me a bottle of frostbitten beer and, despite her exhortations, drank it in small sips through the narrowing ring of ice setting inside the bottle neck.
And now?
You could hardly put your finger on anything more deteriorating our health conditions than hospitals...

Spring came and I was approached by Vitya from the Musical Department.
The one with ancient Roman curls of short blonde hair on his head to whom I in the first year was lending my guitar and who gave me the key to the vacant room on the fifth floor.
Now he came up with a request on behalf of his friend Volodya.
But why did not he talk for himself?
After all, we were together in the United mus-ped and anlofac CJI team and took the honorable third place out of three.
Well, he, like, was shy.
In general, his wife got pregnant and now he had to give blood for the abortion, but he himself was still in the middle of the treatment.
Tripper, see?
Yeah, clear. Of course, I’d do it for him, no problem.
It’s they who gave the key to our love affair with Nadya.
A glass of blood is such a trifle in spring.
And Nadya was worthy of much more than that... 

Men toilet on the third floor of the hostel besides serving its direct purpose was also forcing the student body to wake up from amorphous hibernation.
A mass interested in leaflets is not amorphous any longer. 
However, the most ardent KGBist, with all their rats could not gain a promotion on the ground of headlines from the central press cut out and glued in the toilet for all to see.
At the same time, having appeared on the inside of a booth door, those headings suddenly acquired a certain hidden meaning and forced to look at them from a different angle, not envisaged by the editorial staff of the party publishing organ.
Squatting over the potty, one started to perceive another perspective of the quite ordinary and everyday: 

'Care of Party Has to Be Answered

Chain is Strong by its Links

Same 45 Minutes Again

Quality is the Priority

By Accelerated Schedule

No Amnesty to Bunglers

In the Name of Peace and Prosperity'

The toilet humor spilled from the booths over the tiled wall with two urinals.
I, as usual, sped past the first with the title:

'Waters of North to Flow South'

and pulled up by the second with two headings:

'Biathlon Sport for Courageous

Communism Our Aim'

I finished taking the leak and suddenly felt a strange burning sensation.
Looking down I watched as an unknown murky drop crawled lazily out of the urethra slot.
I froze.
What?
No! It cannot be!

But no pleading could cancel the fact that three days before due to a stupid confluence of circumstances the moment they switched off the light in the hostel rooms there was no one in mine except for a four-year student whom I laid on the nearest bed. 
Purely mechanically.
The reflex worked.
She had never appealed to me, as it's said already – some stupid coincidence.
And with her, I felt no more than the Lucy Mancini's partners from ‘The Godfather' before she was operated on by Dr. Kennedy's surgeon friend. 
Like in a church bell...

Itching and burning did not stop.
All polygamy had to be canceled for an indefinite period.
Twoic advised me to consult with Dr. Grisha.

Doctor ponderously shook his head and admitted that several cases of gonorrhea infection had already been recorded in the hostel.
What f-f.. flicking gonorrhea?
Yes. The symptoms were very similar but to know for sure we needed a laboratory analysis of the semen.
What the f-f.. freak!
But I did not know how to do it, I had never masturbated in my life.
Dr. Grisha volunteered to help.

We locked ourselves in one of the rooms – he, I and Sveta, well, just in case, like, sort of auxiliary contingent.
From his large soft briefcase, Grisha angled a cork sealed glass tube and passed to me to collect the material for analysis. 
I dropped my jeans and underpants knee-deep and sat on a chair for the procedure at hand.
Grisha got seated on the bed opposite, Sveta next to him.
He began to drive my foreskin up and down.
All three of us in earnest tense attention stared at the protruding dick on which Grisha’s hand was rushing blurry with the rapidness of the motion.

After a couple of minutes, Grisha started to swallow his saliva and excitedly announced that the penis was too dry and needed to get moistened. 
I felt gratitude to Sveta for her presence; at least some deterrent.
And I said it’s Okay, never mind, now I knew the way and would try it myself, only I had to take the test tube with me, Okay?

I zipped up my jeans and Grisha gave me a good remedy from his resourceful briefcase, a certain Rifadin in capsules... 

Mindful of Maria’s promise to cure me in case of S.T.D., I called her and she told me to come that evening.
When I explained to her that I had gonorrhea and needed to extract the semen for analysis she opened the bed and started to undress. 
I again explained to her that I had gonorrhea, but she said it did not matter.

Then I also started to undress but warned that I would collect the semen into the test tube. 
She agreed.
Probably, that her coil spring protected not only from pregnancy but from gonorrhea as well.
Only I put the test tube on the nightstand by the radio and we proceeded.

Thais of Athens treated Alexander the Great with some medicine so that they could have it all night long.

I cannot state that all my night with Maria I had an incessant erection.
After another and another of her regular ‘More! Mo-re!’ we rested and then proceeded again because I couldn’t cum until the dawn came sipping in throw the window panes.
Maybe I was restrained by the presence of the uncorked test tube?
I do not know, I am not an expert.

In the broad morning light, I joined her ‘More! I want it! A!' with the grunts of my own and jerked out. 
‘No! No!’ screamed she. ‘In me!’
But it was too late.

With the sense of done duty, I cummed into the laboratory test tube and slammed it shut tightly.
Maria obviously did not like it but so was the arrangement...

Perfectly happy with the accomplishment, I hurried to Dr. Grisha and proudly presented the moisture jailed (with so much a-do) behind the glass.
He took off his white doctor’s gown, grabbed the large soft briefcase and we left his office.

That briefcase could have been seen in different places of Nezhin on that day, accompanied by the passionate roll of Dr. Grisha's buttocks on one side and my disturbed gait of a depressed moose on the other. 
The test tube made the constant fourth to the company, hiding in the back pocket of my jeans with the still unchecked semen.

It seemed that Grisha wanted to help in earnest.
Only the day turned out to be such that venereal dispensary did not work, in some laboratory someone left for somewhere else, in another they had run out of something and so on.
About two in the afternoon our harmonious four (Grisha, briefcase, I and the tube) appeared for some reason at the station and decided that it was enough: all the symptoms matched without any further checking.

I threw the test tube into a gray tubular garbage urn near the large white bust of Lenin put halfway between the station and the high platform for local trains of the Kiev destination.
And the urn itself stood between that bust and the red-and-yellow telephone booth in its oil-paint coat by the corner of the luggage warehouse.
Throwing the tube away was a bit of a plaintive act, like, we were not complete strangers anymore after going together through all we had to after our first meeting, however, there was no good reason to carry it on any further... 

I went to Hosty and then returned to the station.
The week was over and I needed to show up in Konotop so that my parents would not worry.
There were still ten minutes before the local train to Konotop and all of a sudden I was just pulled to pay a visit to the bust of Lenin.
What I saw there literally dumbfounded me.

From the circular orifice of the gray urn, green pliant shoots stuck uncontrollably up. 
I did not immediately get it that while I was away they trimmed the bushes around the pedestal with the bust. 
The train came up and pacing across the platform to the car I looked back to give the urn the last and proud glance – bushes or no bushes but that f-f.. frivolous semen had real vigor in it!
When, of course, abstracting from some unnecessary details...

Rifadin from Grisha imparted a very vivid color to my urine and that’s all.
Thanks to the capsules I pissed with the cheerfully scarlet and, overcoming itching and burning, cursed my stupid incontinence with Lucy Mancini. 

Maria treacherously washed her hands of me as if offended that I preferred some glass tube to her natural vase...

I got cured by Eera.
She simply led me to an elderly woman in a barracks-like children hospital. 
The woman in white took me behind a screen in the corridor to hide from the looks of the queue.
I downed my pants a little, bent forward a little bit, got a shot in my buttock, and…
And that’s all.
Nothing more was required.
And summer came.

How I spent summer.
Like any other decent, diligent, work-loving boy. 
First of all, I became a plant breeder.

Among the beds dug up at the end of the garden on Decemberists 13, there started to grow and strengthen vigorous shoots of cannabis.
The seeds were taken from the booty bushes looted from the neighbor.
Although it seems unjust to call them ‘bushes’.
They looked more like sprouting seedlings of young trees.
The trees were growing like one united family, rushing upwards, turning into a dense thicket, which, of course, needed to be thinned out in the course of selection culling.
From the street, that thicket was not visible screened by the fruit trees, but you cannot hide anything from the neighbors. 

The neighbor on the right asked my mother about the purpose of the cultivated crop.
My mother replied, that hemp produced a lot of seeds (such small, round, oily looking ones) and at the Bazaar the canary keepers were simply scrambling for those seeds to feed their feathered singers.

Oh, how ingenious mother’s love is!
I would never in my life have thought of driving such a fool!
Most likely, I’d give out some stuff about compresses and foot baths from varicose veins aggravated by the deposition of salts.

And that would be a dangerous mistake because in the Plant Settlement nobody kept canaries but there were plenty of labor veterans with deteriorated health.
So what?
Then how's about an honored vet having a loving teenager relative who's ready to give half of his night sleep for a remedy from Grandpa's ailings that grow not too far away?.
Okay, let’s drop spooking ourselves with nightmares.
Anyway, excessive advertising might damage the business growth.

And, by the by, the question was asked by the wife of the robbed neighbor who, in addition to his pension, had also a job of a watchman in the nearby Track Machine Station, aka PMS.

(...and it’s not my fault that the organization’s name in Russian, when abbreviated, coincides with that of Premenstrual Syndrome…)

I did not have many scruples about expropriating his cannabis because after the raid there was left enough of it to keep him to the following season. 

(...it's only now, in retrospect, I think of a possibility that he could have his clients with canaries…) 

By that time, several years had already passed since my mother left the KEMZ Plant and got a job in the RepBase pre-assembly unit.
I gather it, they were checking the availability of helicopter spare parts there. 
Physically her job was not exhausting and on returning home after a day’s work she often shared news about the relationships in the collective of only women except for the unit chief and his deputy.
At work, she played the role of a conflict-extinguisher and amused herself by playing compliments. 
That is, after telling someone another of a pleasantness she scored herself a point.

(...it calls for a good self-schooling and close self-control not to wallow in the repetition of what had been already said…) 

Sometimes the chief of the unit would shake his head and say,
‘That's a cunning she-Jew for you! Found again how to lick!' 
And my mother laughed in return with joy, and she laughed at home retelling the compliment that brought her one more point...

My brother Sasha worked at the PMS in a team of repairers.
They went to change the sleepers on the railway tracks and ram the rocks beneath them with a massive dildo-type vibrator.
He was the only worker there who had technical education in the specifical railway field... 

Our sister Natasha, while there was no work for her, was taking my daughter Lenochka to the kindergarten and back. 

At the request of my father in the personnel department of the RepBase, they gave me a temporary job, until the end of the summer, at the construction shop there.
With three permanent workmen of RepBase, I was demolishing and building somewhat walls within its grounds. 
The most difficult part of the job was waiting until the mortar would be brought for us to work. 
I earned a fig, a fig and one more fig there but then the work was just to sit and sit, or stand up and stand on.
Anyway, the RepBase was obviously happy with my masonry.

With nothing better to do, I again grew a beard and the RepBase workmen baptized me as Fidel Castro. 
My father liked it maybe because he and Fidel were born in the same year.
When I had nothing to smoke, I went to beg from my father.
He worked as a locksmith in the shop with strict regulations about smoking which only was allowed in specially designated places, like an open gazebo in the yard. 

My father was respected on the shop floor for his golden hands and readiness to show how it was done.

When you see a botcher tormenting himself and spoiling the material to produce a throwaway you can laugh quietly and go on your way.
My father was not like that, he couldn’t tolerate illiteracy.
He would stand aside with a painful cringe in his face, then come up, take the instrument from the guy and show how.
‘See? Less convoluted than beat boiling.’
That’s why he was respected and they did not take offense when he muttered:
‘Really have to do it askew? Taught so, eh?’

Many workers of RepBase came there from the nearby village of Popovka and were never trained in the ‘seminary’.

Popovka had integrated with the RepBase so closely that in the village you could see fences made of helicopter blades. 
Discarded, of course.
But the blade wound up to the stake with a piece of wire looks ugly and fixing it with a neat binding as suggested by uncle Kolya was completely another kettle of fish... 

In the unpaneled half of the hutta at Decemberists 13 resided auntie Zina, a lonely pensioner.
She plaited her half-gray hair into stringy maiden braids and tied them together.
On the porch at her door for the most of the year hung a yellow dried circular braid of interwoven onions.
Auntie Zina did not interfere with the life of the yard and smiled at everyone.
In spring, following the directive of our father, my brother and I were turning the dirt in her part of the garden.
Once she was very friendly with Olga and harbored resentment of my role in our divorce, but she still kept smiling even at me... 

There was enough living space in our brick-paneled half-hutta of three rooms and a kitchen plus veranda, apart from the summer room in the yard under one roof with the shed.
Among the inhabitants of all that area, only five-year-old Lenochka was not smoking. 
The rest of us smoked ‘Belomor-Canal’ for 22 kopecks except for Natasha with her filtered ‘Metropolitan’ for 40 kopecks.
She once counted up that the family total expenditure for cigarettes was 25-30 rubles monthly...

The summer was over and before my first departure to the fourth course of English Department, my mother asked if I could bring and introduce to her Eera from Nezhin. 
She knew about Eera from Natasha’s report and subsequent questions to me.
She had even seen Eera on the general photograph from the Borzna wedding.

The picture was taken in the photo studio of the district center, where the guests and relatives of the bride and groom stood in three rows on the long benches of descending height behind the happy pair in the chairs.
My mother asked me to show who from the multitude was Eera and I answered:
‘Find her yourself.’

In the picture I stood in the upper row on the right surrounded by three girls and Eera was in the diagonally opposite corner. 
My mother’s finger touched her face.
‘That’s her?’
I felt that she for some reason would rather be mistaken, but I couldn't lie to my mother. 
‘How d’you guess?’
‘I don’t know.’

(...the first prosaic work in Ukrainian was ‘The Witch of Konotop’ written by Kvitka-Osnovyanenko in 1833.
Ask whoever you choose ‘why?’ and they will answer:
‘I don’t know.’…)

Therefore, in September following the serene summer of 1977 the acquaintance of your mother and grandmother took place at Decemberists 13.

Of course, I had been bringing Eera to Konotop even before that and introduced her to the life of the local upper circle.
We visited the Loony where in honor of her visit there was demonstration gladiatorial performance on the floor. 
I even had, just in case, to block her off with myself nearby the stage.

Then Lyalka led us to his sidekick’s who in his treasure box made of human skull kept a quality grass ‘the cripple’, named so after its source.
The sidekick lived on the fourth floor with his cat whom at times he grabbed and hurled against anything at all.
Not everyone tames their pet with tenderness.
But at night he sometimes woke up from the gentle touch of her fangs to his Adam’s apple.
She did not bite the skin through and just made it clear who rules the ball at night...

When we were about to leave, Eera discovered the loss of her gloves.
The sidekick swore he had not seen any.
I, burning with shame, began to speculate about the gloves being forgotten at the Loony but Lyalka insisted on continuing the search until they were found behind the floor mirror in the hallway.
These cats are sometimes worse than the gang of forty thieves.

In the staircase there naturally was no light and I walked first groping for the steps with my feet and did not even hold onto the railing.
Like the brave tin soldier or the one-eyed leader in the gang of the blind from ‘Eulenspiegel' movie, because in the pitch dark I had Eera's hand on my shoulder and Lyalka was holding on hers. 
So we descended.

At that Eera's visit, we spent the night at Skully's who had already become an Acceptee and lived in a fairly spacey hutta where two ‘Jawa' bikes stood in the garage – one for him and the other for his wife's younger brother. 
Eera and I were left in a separate bedroom and going out Skully and his wife significantly hung a terry towel on the back of the bed.
When we lay down and from the radio ‘Spidola’ sounded the introduction to my favorite ‘Since I’m loving you’ by The Led Zeppelin I realized that nothing better could be provided even by Las Vegas...

At another occasion, we even visited Decemberists 13, at the daytime, naturally, when there was no one there. 
After champagne and a joint, we grew so playful that auntie Zina got funky in her place and began to tap at the front door. 
The sounds reaching her through the partition wall made her think of a bloody murder...

Eera met my brother and sister at the Loony and she knew Lenochka unilaterally by the pictures from the photo session around Rabentus dovecot which I had pasted on the wallpaper over my bed in the hostel.

Apart from Eera who came to Konotop to meet my parents I also took Slavic along.
He and my sister measured each other with guarded looks but didn't sniff. 
And that was correct because I brought Slavic for another purpose – I needed him to put on the alert. 

(...’the most powerful force is the force of habit’ or something like that was said by V. I. Lenin in one of his works in 58 volumes, and, quoting the Whites Colonel from the movie ‘Chapaev’:
‘Yes, here the Bolshevik leader is right.’…)

Consider, for instance, me.
I had got an ample plantation of hemp to keep me lavishly up to the following season even for the tail-falling Slavic and Twoic.
On the other hand, I was in the habit of plundering other folk's plantations.

Who’ll bite the dust – sound reason or deep-rooted habit?
Make bets, gentlemen!

(...it’s sometimes hard refuting Leninist theses…)

And what else, apart from the habit, smashes all chop-logic reasoning?
What drives us on and further on? 
What pushes to the new, the unknown?

Hope – what if the luck would have it?
Faith – but there should be, there is somewhere!. 
And Love, of course, the love of knowledge and change… 

All the summer going by tram along May Day Street I kept track of the growth stages of hemp in Batyuk's hutta yard and hoped, believed and dreamed – what if it were the same sort as the one that Rabentus shared with me for the deeper comprehension of the Scnar's lecture?. 

Once upon a time, Batyuk was a legend and role model for the youth not only of the Plant Settlement but the whole city. 

Everyone knew Batyuk who did not care a damn for the State Auto Inspection, aka GAI, and all the militia in the bargain.
They just couldn’t catch up with him to fine for riding his bike without a helmet wearing only his long windblown hair.
What? Drunk?
You first catch up and check it!

Two patrols ambushed him in the Zelenchuk area so he jumped his ‘Jawa’ between the poplars and shoot away along one of the tram rails.
The word ‘biker’ plodded to Konotop much later – we had Batyuk...

And suddenly thundered the news that shook the boys like the Tower of Babel – Batyuk died!

‘Bullshit! Alive, but in the reanimation.’

And the speed was a mere 60 kph, well, plus that of the counter-moving bus whose radiator Batyuk rammed with his head that chanced to have a helmet at the moment.
‘Got it, guys? The helmet is a good idea, so they do not need to scratch your brains off things after, the crap remains in the helmet neat and tidy.' 

Batyuk survived, only his mug remained checkered after the restoration.
They took the motorcycle from him together with the license and never gave back.
In protest, he became bald and got some jack job. 
In short, Batyuk was no more a legend.

However, he bought a scooter.
He made a candy of it – the windshield, rear-view mirrors, all kinds of pendants there.
The saddle was covered with fleece, long and white.
And (what was characteristic) he never rode his scooter without a helmet on his head.
A biker’s helmet, and also white to match the fleece under his ass...

And now let’s reflect on a natural situation – I go to bomb his hemp and he suddenly pops out: how could I know what’s still left under that white helmet?
So I brought Slavic too since there was enough of space. 

When it got dark we two went out.

‘Once we went to do our job, me and Rabinovich...’

Before our departure, Eera got very nervous and asked to lock her up in the summer room. 
‘What’s the problem? Lock the door from inside.’
‘No! You do it.’
Well, I locked the door from outside and gave the key back through the window because I did not know when we were going to return.

(...there’s still a lot of things that I will never understand…)

When we returned with the pillage Eera checked it.
No! She did not even smoke cigarettes but could determine the grass quality by sniffing at it.
With the accuracy up to 80 %.

In general, the spoils from Batyuk were from the remaining 20%, I wouldn’t grow such crap on my plantation...

Later in Nezhin, Slavic sniffed out one more plantation next to the bridge across the Oster, near the Bazaar square.
He brought me to the location and showed the lush beauties as if decorated with ostrich feathers of green.
However, the property was surrounded by a high fence.

I also do not like monotony but we again went out in the dark because of a habit is the most irresistible force… 

So, I climbed over the fence and with the ghostly gait of a sneaking redskin approached the one-year-old trees.
The hutta stood further aside and was not in the way with the light in only one window.
Well, let the man watch his TV program, I did not mind.

No sooner than I gently rustled the magnificent beauties when the ground started jumping in pulsating seismic tremors accompanied with a thunder-like clatter from the hutta direction and the light from the window was eclipsed by the black silhouette of that galloping Dog of Baskervilles. 
All happened in a split second and, actually, without my participation.
The instinct, laid in our spinal cord by countless generations of gnawed to death and shredded ancestors, did the trick.
I could only watch how the fence jumped to meet me and my right pedal extremity kicked its top rail.

Somewhere unbelievably far below, by the narrow vein of the Oster river, shimmering in the darkness of the night, the already indistinguishable fence quaked with the hammering push of the wolfhound.
I left the upper layers of the stratosphere but halfway to the moon, I realized that there was not enough air in my lungs for the return to my native planet. 
So I did not become ‘Apollo 14’…

Slavic was saved only by the desperate spurt from the spot of my landing.
Because among the ancestors, that formed our spinal cord, a lot of guys had got also squashed...

The fourth course was not sent to a collective farm with patronage assistance, we had a month of school practice but this time in village schools.
Another difference to the school practice at the third course, finalized with a written comment from a respective city school teacher, bubbling of what incredibly wonderful teachers we, the students she had been in charge of, were going to become in future, was that each group of trainees had an overseer from the English Department to assess our professional skills from the practice results.
Eye for an eye, so to speak, because we also evaluated them in our studying years...

When we, the first-year students, were divided into study groups Lydia Panova became the curator of mine.
She was a spinster in unrequited love with the English Department Deputy Dean, Alexander Bliznyuk, who, in his turn, was in unrequited love with his beautiful young wife.
Taking advantage of his official position, he employed his wife as a teacher at the English Department as soon as she graduated the Nezhin institute, but the ungrateful one soon fled to someone else in Kiev. 

Lydia Panova, with her hormonal mustache, thick glasses and equally thick makeup mask on her face had no chance to lasso Bliznyuk, although the girls of my group were pulling for her.
She lived in the five-story block for the institute teachers by the sports grounds in the Count’s Park and whenever Bliznyuk had an imprudence of walking under her balcony she started talking to him in English and the next day she taught us more enthusiastically.

The second group curator was Nona Panchenko (not a relative to the famous boxer) she also was unmarried and wore glasses but no cosmetic plaster and looked much younger than Panova.
Once at some kind of voluntary Saturday work, Veerich wanted to treat her to a glass of wine.
I played the errand-boy and approached her with it, like, would you have a sip of lemonade to quench the labor thirst?
She smiled at me with a pleasant smile and refused.
Nona smiled pleasantly at everyone but wasn’t lassoing anybody.

The curator of the third group wore glasses (again!) was a blonde and a perfect fool too.
She mastered English within the limits of the textbook by Galperin for the first-year students and unconsciously loved Sasha Bryunchugin, the boy in the third group.
To that conclusion, I was led by her habit to take the floor at every general meeting of the English Department with a harangue in his address.
Like that Roman senator with his constant call to destroy Carthage.

A local boy from a well-to-do family, polite and ever smiling, he two times a month attended classes.
Who would ask for more?

She literally f-f.. frustrated everyone with her crying in the wilderness.
As we already were on the fourth course at a meeting in the big fourth auditorium, she again took the floor to chew the same rag: 
‘Admire, please! Bryunchugin’s skipping even the general meeting!’
And then even the wind outside couldn’t stand it anymore and slammed the high windows open on the occasion of spring and good weather.
The panes were almost smashed out.
She ducked and forgot what there was further to be said of Carthage.

And at last, the curator without glasses, the curator of not feminine gender, the curator of the fourth group was Roma Gurevitch.
He was also a Jew, as any other of all the Gurevitches I’ve ever met, or as that same Bliznyuk, only older and balder.
And he was always busy with something or talking to someone and steaming with enthusiasm.

Once I had to retake a test on the subject he taught.
The affair was to be settled in the Old Building, of course.
Making sure that he got out of the New Building in the right direction, I went to the Old Building and waited for his approach.
Ten minutes later I grew worried and combed through the two hundred meters of the asphalt path between the Old and the New Buildings.
He had just reached the corner of the New Building stopping every counter moving teacher for an animated discussion.
I returned to the position by the Old Building but this time got seated on a bench under the birches.
Twenty minutes later he could be spotted by the big sad bust of Gogol.
Good fellow, Roma! The half of the way’s done!

Do you have much of choice when the teacher is late for the appointed retaking of the test you failed at the first go?

It took Roma sixty-two minutes to cover that f-f.. flustering two hundred meters, but I’m sure that was not the limit of his knack for loitering.
For that, I bestowed him with the handle ‘ebulient slacker'. 

His official name was ‘Roma-Phonetist’.
He was distinguished against all the other teachers at the English Department by the purest pronunciation of the sound ‘th'. 
It was he who read the texts about the Parkers family at the tape-recorder for the students to parrot them in the booths of the language laboratory.
No wonder he was referred to as ‘Phonetist’...

Besides the Phonetics, we were taught lots of other subjects, different and necessary.
Take for example the Comparative Lexicosemantosurdographosemasiology – your tongue would go to pieces before you manage to pass the exam.
That Comparative Lexi… well, whatever.. ology we learned under a hereditary teacher. 
The dynasty broke off at her because she was a retired virgin and chastely buttoned her teacher’s raincoat with a huge safety pin up to her very throat.
She was an irreplaceable pensioner because it was her who wrote the textbook on the subject.

A skinny paperback pamphlet from the institute printing house with the smeared typeface authored by… well, it's embarrassing… the name such… with some whistling sound in it, or maybe hissing?. 
Anyway, the name was shorter than that of the subject.

If during her lectures she allowed herself too much, sort of, walking along the aisle between long desk rows, say, how do they stick down my comparatively smeared pearls into their notebooks? – there was nothing easier than putting her in her proper place.
Undo your shirt on the chest, two or three buttons, and stroke wistfully and gently your hair on the solar plexus.
All.
The hissing wanderings got safely blocked and till the break bell, she would be sitting at the teacher desk like a nice little girl staring at her plan of the lecture which she knew by heart. 
I do adore virgins.

Zhomnir once said that after even the briefest talk with her he got an itching desire to take a bath.
Well, tastes differ.
I do not remember if I took a shower after the exam on that most Comparative – well, how-d’you-call-it – at which I also had to scratch my chest...
 
And all those were our specialization subjects apart from general ones lectured by teachers from other faculties and departments.
And each lecturer imagined himself to be Don Corleone and demanded due respect, like, he made me an offer I couldn’t refuse and returning to the student hostel I would plunge into the study of his subject.
Yeah, as soon as I’m back to Hosty!

The only one who evoked sympathy in me was Samorodnitsky for some of the philosophies.
He lit a cigarette at his exam.
Openly so, imposingly, and with all that in a good manner – he took from his briefcase an ashtray with a lid and shook the cigarette ash off in it. 
To that examination, I came from Hosty and started driving some kind of fool improvising from a lamppost, perhaps from even a different philosophy. 
But he suddenly got interested, sat upright and put me four.
He said that I needed to change the faculty and he would see to it, but he soon emigrated to Israel...

So, I was practicing at the school of a sugar factory at the station of Nosovka (twenty minutes by a local train from Nezhin in the Kiev direction) and Zhomnir was in charge of our group of trainees.
Early in the morning, we went there from the high platform of the Nezhin station – a team of ten students from different groups and Zhomnir in his teacher raincoat and dark blue beret, gripping his briefcase with cave-in sides. 

(...everyone dresses according to their role model.
Beret, raincoat, briefcase – read ‘teacher’.
Can you imagine a plumber in such outfit?
That’s what I mean…)

Before the practice, my mother sewed me a jacket. 
It looked like a geologist anti-encephalitis jacket but from a thick tarpaulin of green color.
I liked it especially its color – so Robin-Hoodish.

The most vivid impression from the practice was left by the football match between the sugar factory team and that of the Fastov station locomotive depot.
The game in the championship of the Cup of the Trade Union Committee of the South-Western Railway took place on the school football field. 
I went out of the school building for a break between lessons and got stuck.

It was a warm and sunny September day.
On the green grass of the field, some twenty men were chasing a single ball and a separate mujik chased after them all and whistled with shrill trills. 
The crowds of fans were represented by, firstly, a frowning man in black overalls and, secondly, me.
I started the count with him because he was the first to stand by the field edge and he was a more intent watcher – it took me a while to go under the trees behind one of the goals for to stuff a joint.

On coming back I left a respectful distance between me and the other fan not to tease his sense of smell with vain hopes or odd reminiscences.
I just stood and enjoyed the championship match.
A sharp sting in the neck threw me from high.
I recoiled, slapped the wasp and jerking around saw Igor Recoon sneaking up from behind with a guileful grin.
I hid neither the joint nor the smoke. 
‘Igor, when you have any questions come up openly and speak easy.’
He effaced the smile and said, no, he was just so, and then hurried to the school where sounded the long bell for classes.

A young errand-boy arrived on his bicycle with a bag-load of doping for the local mujiks in the field.
They jogged and gulped and passed the bottles to each other to furiously rush forward.

The right halfback of the visiting team passed the ball to the central forward.
He went to the corner of the penalty and with a slight but accurate blow rolled the ball into the bottom left corner of the goal.
‘Goal!’ shouted the striker together with the rest of his team.
‘No!’ roared the local mujiks.
Jogging back to his half of the field the striker came across a wall of three locals.
‘No goal!’ they yelled at him.
‘As if I argue,' answered he running around their line still unable to suppress his contented smile. 

There was no way to prove anything because the goal had not mesh and the referee at the goal moment was looking up in the sky along with the bottom of the bottle handed to him by a local footballer.
I approached the first half of the match watchers and put a direct question:
‘So was it a goal or what?’
The mujik in overalls nodded sullenly.

I rejoiced that the truth, even though mutely, was still present in this world, at least among the working class.
The match for the Cup of the Trade Union Committee of the South-Western Railway ended 0 : 0... 

Zhomnir warned that as Head of the Practice he couldn’t put me more than three for the chronic missing of written lesson plans.
And I couldn't even force myself to at least copy that f-f.. flaming plans from Igor, I was physically unable to line dolls sitting on the piano lid. 
I asked him not to worry and put whatever mark he could.
I really did not give an f-f.. found it of no difference, I mean.

When on the third floor of the Old Building the four-year students practice results were fixed next to the Time-Table I was the one and only having ‘three’.
Zhomnir alarmed and started to convince the Deaness that it was wrong and he could not have imagined I was so unique.
She impregnably advised looking before jumping. 

The Deaness always tried to look like Alice Freindlich from ‘The Office Romance’ movie only that no Myagkov turned up for her and she became a flinty bureaucrat.
And she kept in her cupboard a skeleton of the divorce on the grounds of sexual incompatibility because the girls from the English Department did not leak unverified information.

Okay, enough, that’ll do for strangers...

Your personal conception took place on the fourth floor of Hosty.
That particular dating Eera arranged herself since it was a room of girls and among the students of the Physics and Math Department I knew only that pair of cooks from the student construction platoon after the second course, but they lived in the city.

Before that, I once again fell in love with Eera but at first, I had put the end to my polygamy. 

And could it be otherwise?
To Eera alone I owed that salvage shot from gonorrhea. 

So, on arrival to Nezhin for the final academic year I became straight and reasonable.
And I dryly informed Sveta of my reformation in response to her attempts at the old familiarity.
We became a passing acquaintance and vague recollection to each other.

And I returned Maria the book I had borrowed and kept for several months.
Though, I chose a late hour for nullifying that bifurcation. 
She opened her door to the staircase landing in the unbuttoned robe over her nightgown.

If we assume the possibility of time shifts, then at that moment it easily could be I lying in her bed cursing that dork outside too dull to get it that he was not on time! 
I did not develop this theory but simply handed the book in, thanked and left...

And since then my love belonged only to Eera.
Absolutely and completely.
Especially after I fell in love with her again.

Having met her by chance on the third floor of the Old Building in the wing belonging to the Philology Department, I persuaded Eera to skip a class and after the bell, we sneaked along the wide empty corridor to the side staircase. 
We did not go down the stairs but followed the ascending flights although there was not the fourth floor and the last flight was blocked by a partition with the locked door to the attic.
We stopped in the middle of that flight and kissed.

(...her classic breasts under the knitted green sweater of a shade of river algae to match her mermaid’s hair, the silk skirt on strong hips (abstract outlines of thin bunches of white on the background of black, tailored by Maria Antonovna, Lyalka’s mother) Austrian high wedge boots, her eyes slant all too slightly, the white slender Lorraine cross of the tall window frame behind her with the azure blue of the sky in its panes, the splash of the white dove’s wings on the other side of that cross – all that and everything else merged into the picture that I will see and remember all my life…)

But having memories alone was not enough for me, I wanted to keep all that or to stay myself within it, among that desperately inexpressible beauty.
The kisses were to no avail to stop the moment. 
So there remained neither choice, no other way out but to once again fall in love.

In the evening, on the stairs in Hosty, Eera gave me the key to the room of the Phys-Math students so that I went first to open it and she would come a minute later to keep the rules of secrecy.

We did not turn on the light.
The bed stood by the window overlooking the Oster banks invisible in the darkness.

With Eera the burden of protection lay on me, that is, getting out in time to avoid abortion was my responsibility.
But that evening…
...a little bit more!. I'm in control!.. more!. just a sec… y-u!.. out of the blue!.. too late… the train's left… 

You were on that train among the crowd of exactly the same fellow travelers, only you turned out to be a little bit nimbler...

Well, and then – a smooth transition to already worked out technology: as a noble man, I had to marry. 
More so, that I would not survive another Eera’s report on an abortion under general anesthesia...

When Eera was still a schoolgirl she found a ring on the bridge over the Oster.
A casual ring of those that they sell at stalls of fake jewelry.
Eera brought it home and her mother, Gaina Mikhailovna, got sad and distressed but she said nothing to her daughter.

Was Eera’s marriage with the divorced me a misalliance?
Undoubtedly and undeniably.
A mere matching of the parent pairs against each other would prove it to the hilt:

a RepBase spare parts checker – a teacher of German language at the Nezhin State Pedagogical Institute of Order of the Labour Red Banner named after Nikolai Vasilyevich Gogol;
a RapBase locksmith – the Deputy Director of the Nezhin Bakery Plant.

However, the factor of your presence, albeit still unborn, mitigated the caste prejudices, which, by the way, had long since been abolished by the Soviet system.

And yet, even in the era of the developed socialism in our country for my and Eera's pre-wedding trip to Kiev, I had to go with a stake in my anus. 

Kiev was needed to exchange the coupons from Nezhin ZAGS for goods in the metropolitan bridal salons.
The stamp on divorce in my passport nullified any discounts for a wedding ring for me, but my sister Natasha promised to equip me with the narrow gold ring that she, for some reason, wore on her thumb.

As for the stake, it was not seen from the outside, but caused intolerable acute pangs inside, turning my gait into dragging shuffles of a semi-paralytic old man or that of a young Cossack raider, who had been removed from the said stake after a slightly belated amnesty. 
‘Mercy, Cossack-brothers! Finish me off!’

Poor Eera!
Would any girl in her girlish dearest dreams ever dream of such a companion to a bridal salon?
Never! By no means! And no over again!

To me the torments suffered on that trip served the palpable reminder of the truth from Heraclitus: never enter the same river, or woe is to your ass! 
Alas! The wisdom of the previous generations does not make us wiser until we (as the Ukrainian Cossacks cared to put it in their famous letter to the Sultan of Turkey) sit on a hedgehog with our own dear ass. 

Nevertheless, in Kiev, the bride got rigged for the impending happy occasion and I bought brown shoes made by a Dutch company ‘Topman'. 
They were a bit too big size for me but the realities of the epoch of deficits had taught to keep tight a bird in the hand and a month later they become a hand-me-down to my father-in-law.
That’s for whose sake I was dragging that stake!

Soon I felt better and we started looking for a suit to dress the groom.
We combed through the department stores of major railway stations between Nezhin and Kiev – Nosovka, Kobyzhchi, Bobrovitsa – to no avail.
The suit was hunted down only in Chernigov far from the electrified railroads and imparted me quite a decent look.

A week before the wedding I left the hostel and moved to live in the three-room apartment of Eera's parents...

The eldest of their four children, Igor, served as a major of some sophisticated troops in Kiev.
Victoria, their next child, lived in Chernigov and worked in the museum there.

Then came Tonya, who graduated the NGPI and was sent to teach the Russian language and literature to kiddies in a Transcarpathian village until a local boy, Ivan, kindled with his Bandera-man-like manners of courting the reciprocal feelings in her. 
Unable to overcome the language barrier, he knocked on the door of the young teacher and when it opened he mutely pointed his shotgun at her chest. 
Like, be mine or nobody’s else.
Ivan’s brothers were in time to disarm him, but the depth of feelings of the romantic lover impressed Tonya and such her attitude gave her a chance to survive among the superb views of the Transcarpathian nature.
She married him, gave birth to a pair of lovely children, returned to Nezhin and lived with her whole young family in one of the narrow bedrooms in the three-room apartment of her parents.

The parents for their night rest enjoyed the folding sofa in the passage living room, by the wall opposite the wide window with a tulle curtain which separated the windowsill and couple of flower pots on it from the closely adjoined table with the TV box in its center.
Behind it (the curtain) were also hidden the backs of the chairs crowded in between the table and the windowsill so that they would not take up space until needed. 
The chairs were from one set with the table which, if you remove from it the iron, a messy pile of central newspapers, the TV, and the oilcloth could be folded out for a celebration feast. 

When there was no festivity those chairs from the set that found no place under the folded-back table were put in the corners of the living room, draped with household clothes, keeping that same newspapers on their seats and all sorts of things that were put there for a couple of minutes and forgotten for a couple of months. 
In the living room, there was also a wardrobe with a big mirror in its door and a lacquered cupboard with dishes behind its sliding glasses. 
Upon the cupboard, leaning its frame against the wallpaper stood repro of ‘The Unknown Beauty' by Kramskoy who contemptuously looked from under her ostrich feather at all that rubbish collection around including ‘The Major's Matchmaking' repro fixed on the opposite wall. 

There was no balcony in the apartment thanks to its being situated on the first floor but there was a boxroom niche in the tiny passage between the living room and the bedroom with Tonya's family. 

Eera and I were placed in the second, narrower, bedroom with a large plywood chiffonier from the times of the 20th Congress of the CPSU and a veteran pier glass on a small table between the door and the windowsill.
Along the wall with the carpet of almost the same pattern as in my parents’, there stood the hand-me-down conjugal double bed for the soon-would-be newlyweds.
It remained only to get married.

In the evening before the bridal, Gaina Mikhailovna offered her services for ironing the trousers of my wedding suit. 
She could do it, in her opinion, virtuously.
In the years of the German occupation the young girl Gaina was taken from a remote Ukrainian village and moved to Germany and she worked there for more than two years as a ‘guest worker' in a well-to-do German family which led to her mastering of the above-mentioned art... 

Strange is the way of shuffle-and-deal of the knowledge deck and that’s how I learned that Pants Are To Be Ironed On Four Sides.
I clearly understood the rule and firmly kept to it all my life but at that particular moment the unconquered spirit of a young pioneer partisan awoke in me and I rejected the offer of my next-day-to-be mother-in-law.
Like, it was not the first time for me to iron trousers through a piece of moistened gauze.
With the ironing accomplished, I hung the trousers over the back of a chair in the living room and went to bed.

In the morning I was awakened by Eera’s crying.
I went out to the living room and following the silent sullen glare of Gaina Mikhailovna could see an undeniably hot iron print on one of the trouser-legs hanging carefully from the back of the chair. 
Poor Eera!

The burnt spot, albeit blurred and lacking the clear-cut outline, discernibly changed the smoky shade of dark gray of the trousers fabric to something greenish.
I could swear that nothing of the kind was there in the evening but the spot sat on one of the two sides I had applied the iron to.

It cost me a hell of a lot of efforts to persuade Eera not to cancel going to the ZAGS office – we had pulled through too much of everything to make a U-turn at the last moment.
I gave her the solemn oath to hide the damaged part of my outfit into the long folds of her wedding dress.
And why do brides always cry before the wedding?
Poor Eera!

Then there was a very long wait at the registry office because of that bastard Slavic, the witness on the groom's side, appeared only after my brother Sasha signed Slavic's name instead of him. 
A good news that they do not check witness' passports in ZAGS. 

Yes, my brother and sister came from Konotop for the wedding and departed by the 17.15 local train.

And at last in all of its glory arrived the dazzle of a breath-taking moment in the nuptials – they suggested us exchange our wedding rings in a token of spousal love and loyalty. 
Softly glided the ring on the Eera’s incomparable finger – yellow of the gold over the alabaster white skin.
And now, already not as a bride, but the accomplished wife took she my wedding ring from the white saucer to don it on my finger.

On slid the ring, in moved my finger… my finger moved in… my f-f.. finger moved… 

Why that bitch of the ring from Natasha got stuck on my finger joint, I have no idea because at the preliminary tests it, like, was getting over.

In a low voice, I promised my young wife that, okay, I'll stick it in later, and I balled my hand into a fist to hide the under-donned ring. 

‘The wedding ring is not a frill… Oh, no!. 
Not an empty decoration...’

Poor Eera!
But what could she do?
The incipient maternal instinct balked at getting born you without a daddy...

However, my brother Sasha on the pictures taken at the registry office looked very well, like a young Sicilian mafioso.

The newlywed together with their witnesses (Slavic had already replaced Sasha) according to the long-established Nezhin tradition took a ride in a taxi. 
The taxi took us to the station to honk in the square in front of it (the traffic bridge over the railway tracks had been already completed) and proceeded to the city boundary along the highway to Pryluki where a bottle of champagne was burst open after which we returned to 26, Red Partisans, apartment 11. 

The wedding party was a modest one – for the closest family inhabiting the apartment plus the two witnesses.
The TV was temporarily exiled to the corner, the table spread out and covered with feasting of mostly salad ‘Olivier’ which Gaina Mikhailovna had finely chopped filling in the preparation half of an enamel washing basin.
And the drinks were fabulous too.
Like in the traditional refrain in the finals of the Russian fairy tales:
‘And I was at that wedding and drank the mead and beer...’
Subtracting ‘the mead’, of course.

Gaina Mikhailovna, like any other properly erudite woman, had long ago gained the upper hand over her husband, bent him to her will and twisted around her little finger employing the panic fear of males before the prospect of becoming a cuckold. 

(...fall in with what your dear wife tells you and be happy with two glasses of beer on a celebration day since you haven’t got that proud decoration of stags yet…)

Hence that beer on the wedding table.

Tonya and Ivan took turns looking after their baby daughter in the bedroom, and their three-year-old Igor was also sitting at the table. 
Then the baby was brought to the living room and the newlywed together with the witnesses replaced her in the bedroom which, although narrow, let the four of them dance under a tape recorder borrowed from the hostel.

When Eera and I retired to our bedroom for the nuptial first night I turned on the transistor radio on the table under the pier mirror. 
The nocturnal sconce on the whitewashed wall at the foot of the bed created a flickering red twilight like a feeble torch in a medieval castle.

The blanket was too thick and hot and we threw it back, twining in already legalized conjugal embraces.
We were going on real groovy and then the door to the bedroom flung open and my father-in-law stepped in to turn off the radio.

I did not hide my nakedness, just stopped sitting in place.
Eera also froze.
In the mute twinkling of the torch from the niche between the carpet and the chiffonier, Ivan Alexeyevich, without looking up, left the bedroom. 
The prince of the three-room castle.

How could I know it was too loud?
He could just call out from their folding sofa.
Okay, let’s have another take...

Three following days all the meals were of salad Olivier but half of it went stale all the same.
And who would doubt?
No way to finish off such a heap without drinking.

That’s how, in outline, they enter into misalliance marriages...

On the whole, I liked my father-in-law and I forgave him the absence of a minimal kit of normal tools on the shelves in the boxroom niche, as well as his distrust in my ability to repair the electric iron relic of Stalinist epoch. 
Besides, when the three-year-old explorer Igor pulled a handful of hemp seeds from the pocket of my jeans left in the bedroom and scattered the find on a stool in the kitchen, my father-in-law did not aggravate the exposure with unnecessary questions though, in his position, he understood the varieties of grain... 

The son of a Bryansk mujik, he, as an 18-year-old recruit, got caught into the Kharkov ‘meat grinder', where the German Wehrmacht, waking up after the defeat near Moscow, proved that they knew their business by crushing several Soviet armies. 
Stunned by the power and shocked with the spectacle of the artillery mass execution, Ivan, in the endless crowds of tens of thousands other survivors, was taken to a prisoner-of-war camp in Germany. 

Then there was an unspoken of agreement between the warring parties to reimburse each other through banks in neutral countries for the cost of keeping prisoners of war.
And only the country of the Soviets remained aloof from that arrangement since every captured Red Army soldier automatically became a traitor to the Soviet Homeland. 
Hence the difference in the havvage for war-prisoners of different nations.

In order to feed the prisoners from the Red Army at least somehow, occasional freight trains brought to the camps agricultural products looted from the occupied Soviet territories. 

In one of the cars of such an echelon arrived at Ivan's camp, there were several sacks of black seeds. 
The Germans could not guess the purpose of the product not described in any of the cookbooks.

When the prisoners demonstrated how to use sunflower seeds, rational Germans were unable to understand that the final result (chewing of a scanty grain) was not as important as the process itself – that of gnawing and secreting the anticipatory saliva.

So those sacks just lay around, irrationally cluttering the storage room, until one of the guards had figured out how to use the seeds.
He organized a sports event: 100-meter race. 
The winner received a packet of seeds.
Under the screams of the guard-fans, the young and tall, although as emaciated as the rest of the prisoners, Ivan ran first and received his prize.

In the second race, he again was out of reach, but the guard said that he had enough already and gave the seeds to the second to come.
My father-in-law took offense and ceased to take part in the subsequent competitions, but he told me that those seeds were the most delicious in his life...

Sometimes the prisoners of war ran for 100 meters, sometimes they ran away from the camp.
Then they were caught, brought back and executed in front of all the other prisoners, which did not prevent the following attempts at escape.
And that is quite natural because sometimes you feel that you don't care anymore and fuck it all. 

When such a moment rolled up to Ivan, he, taking into consideration the experience of the previous fugitives, did not go east but turned west and therefore got to France.
For about one year a French farmer family hid him in a barn from German patrols, and when the coast was clear he helped with the work at the farm.
Once the three-year-old son of the farmer, not speaking any language yet, warned him with his gestures about an unexpected arrival of a patrol…

Then the Americans started the Western front and liberated him.
And they moved farther and farther until they brought freedom to the Ukrainian girl Gaina from her unpaid work for a well-to-do German family.

When Stalin demanded from his allies to return all the Soviet citizens freed from German captivity, the Americans did not argue.
Ivan and Gaina, among many others like them, were brought to a French port city, where, by the way, they met each other and from where were taken by a steamboat to Leningrad.

The fate favored them because the overwhelming majority of the war prisoners were taken to the east by trains.
On the border with the USSR, where the railway track gauge gets different, they were walked to the awaiting echelons of freight cars and brought, over the vast expanses of our Homeland, to the camps of the Gulag in Siberia and the Far North. 
What for?
Just in case.
So that their memories of what they had seen in German captivity would not spoil the picture carefully engineered in the brainwashed minds and collective memory of the Soviet people.

‘Nothing is forgotten, nor anyone...' 

Provided that the unforgotten were correctly retouched by the censorship.

Even I brought up on vivid examples from Soviet literature and cinema, lost plenty of stereotypes when I accidentally heard my mother-in-law talking on the phone to her friend who also passed the inferno of the German captivity. 
‘...and do you remember how on February 23 we bought champagne and went to congratulate our pilots?..’

Ta-dah!
It turned out that on the Day of Soviet Army and Fleet not only secret agent Stirlitz was drinking alcohol in fascist Germany but the captured Soviet aces as well… 

In Leningrad, Ivan and Gaina arranged for their marriage and directly enlisted to work in one of the Soviet Central Asian republics. 
That was a wise move.
The subsequent purges and combing for former prisoners of war and other citizens who had seen a non-Soviet way of life did not reach them there. 

In the Soviet camps, they would not have to eat sunflower seeds. 
Our camp system, aka zona, is the most human in the world and it does not protract your sufferings with humiliating prizes for sports achievements... 

After the central press announced the elimination of the consequences of the cult of Stalin, they moved to Ukraine and settled in the countryside, just in case, and from there they rose to Nezhin.

(...once my father tried to explain to me that the progress of life is going on in a spiral.
I did not understand him, although he drew clarifying circles in the air with his index finger.

The fate of Ivan Alexeyevich can serve as an argument in favor of that theory.
In our life, we walk in a circle of the same events, but they, because of the spiral-like proceeding of life, acquire new aspects and details, so we don't recognize them when they are repeating themselves, we just move by and on, and further. 

I do not know whether my father-in-law had been drawing any parallels between the seeds he won and his position at the Nezhin Bakery Plant.
In both cases, it's a grain disposal. 
But then, what he should need such a geometry for…)

In the fourth year of study I became an almost exemplary student, my classes attendance increased enormously.
I couldn’t stay in the apartment when Eera went to the institute.

At the lectures, I submerged into the endless history of Joseph and his brothers. 
It became more convex and pleasantly slow-go after a joint during the break.
When sounded the final bell I went down to the side hall on the first floor filled with the students’ coats on pegs along its walls and helped Eera into hers.
Then among the hullabaloo of donning students, I looked for a tiny piece of white fuzz on my coat and took it off. 
Only then I put my coat on and we went home.

That white thread of arachnid yarn appeared on the gray fabric of my coat each time after I had a joint in an educational institution.
Yes, in place of the sheepskin coat I wore a demi-saison camel coat bought from Alyosha Ocheret when he was in his final year.
I did not share my discovery of the fluff phenomenon with anyone but for myself dubbed it a ‘God's marking a rascal’.

Sometimes, to check it experimentally, I refrained from a joint at the break and then the fluffy piece did not appear.
So before putting on my coat, I inspected it in search of a white mark. 
It never skipped its duty.

My love for Eera became deeper.
Sometimes she asked me not to gaze at her so steadily, especially in public, but I still hoped to stop the moment.

‘He gazed at her like a dog at a crystal vase...' 

Occasionally, we visited the hostel for a pool at Preferans.
Because of Eera being in the family way we did not smoke while playing it.
Only Twoic at times, with an air of a schooled hussar cadet, asked her for a kind permission and smoked to envy me and Slavic.
And Eera, sitting on a bed by the window would finely cut in tiniest shreds a Belomor-Canal cigarette taken from me.

She did not make a secret of her pregnancy and still in the second month ordered from Lyalka’s mother an elegant spacious sarafan made of brown cloth.

Once, already in the spring, she left the hostel first while I was delayed in the lobby with Twoic.
When I went out on the porch, Eera stood near the corner of the building in a quarrel with a student of the Biology department drooping from a window on the second floor.
Unfit to grasp the meaning of the sarafan the dork of a sophomore tried to pick up an unknown beauty.
I demanded of him an apology to the lady but received an insolent refusal. 

While I was rising to his room, Twoic joined me in the staircase, but there were three guys in the room.
There followed a muddled battle with varying success and steady reinforcements to the inmates were coming from the neighboring rooms.

I recollect a moment when I was standing on someone’s bed and one of the opponents kept his mug in front of me begging for a kick, but I restrained myself because of too obviously he wanted it.

In the end, I was lying on the floor pressed down with the weight of three adversaries who tried to immobilize me, but somewhere in the corner, Twoic was still fending off the outnumbering enemy forces. 
And then the door flew open – Eera stood on the threshold with an unknown ruler in her hands and a shrill cry:
‘I’ll cut them all!’

I was so impressed by the absurdity of the situation: Eera’s pirate warcry, and that wooden ruler in her hands, and you in her belly — that I laughed.
All the present followed my example.

It is not possible to seriously fight someone who you’ve just laughed along with.
I was helped to get up and we left...

Being unfit to stop the moment, I had to change priorities.
My task became to protect her.
Protect from the babel turmoil in the crowd of students putting on their coats.
From her friends with their snake stings:
‘Hi! How ugly you grew today!’

To guard against her fears of the things to come – they said, the paramedic Kerdun in the maternity hospital was so cruel, every woman in labor was complaining afterward about her. 
And protect from so incomprehensible but negative Rh factor in Eera herself...

Protecting from all the world ready to attack at any moment from where you do not expect calls for being alert.
So I kept low and was on a constant look-out. 
That position led to my alienation from the hostel, from the course-mates, from the institute.

Only with Zhomnir I still kept in touch.
He was the scientific supervisor to my term work ‘The means of irony in ‘The Judgement Seat’, the story by W. S. Maugham’.
Besides, I needed him as a means to fence off some place for me with Eera in this malevolent world.
He promised to take my translations for a ‘matchmaking’ at one of the publishing houses in Kiev where he had connections.
But it had to be a collection of 20-25 stories in Ukrainian.

I kept visiting his place and he was saying in jest that his wife, Maria Antonovna, fell in love with me.
The two of them lived in a three-room apartment on the fifth floor in one of the blocks along Shevchenko Street, because their children had already matured and separated.
The sons moved to Russia, and the daughter lived in Nezhin at her husband’s.

The Zhomnirs used only two rooms for living, the third one Alexander Vasilyevich turned into an archival study furnished with a desk, a chair and stacks of shelves from long thick boards up to the ceiling, filled with bundles of cardboard folders, books, magazines, and papers piled even on the windowsill in the wall opposite the door.
I liked it.

And I also liked Eera’s story about the inhumanity of Zhomnir.
His family then lived in the same five-story block with Eera’s parents and doing renovation in his flat he divided the floor area by the number of his family members, painted the quotient equaling part, put the brush in a jar with water, wished the labor successes to the rest of the family and washed his hands.

His wife, Maria Antonovna, a noiseless woman with the gray to radiant whiteness hair, presented me with a book of poetry by Marina Tsvetaeva and made me fall in love with it. 
Before that, I believed that poetesses were only good at lace weaving, I mean, to add ladies’ needlework to poetry pieces.
Marina is not like that, she knows how to rape the words when necessary.

I remembered her poetry in the local train vestibule when coming from Konotop.
Because I still remained an iterant passenger although not every week as earlier.
Just from the sense of duty to Lenochka.
She always was a good child and I even loved her in my own way.
It’s only that I am not good at playing and lisping with kids.
I'm getting bored in less than ten minutes.

In the vestibule, I had a smoke and then all of a sudden started to feel the lapel of my camel coat. 
I don’t know why.
And it turned out a long tailor’s needle, entirely stuck between the layers of the fabric, was hidden in the lapel corner.
It was not an easy task to get it out.
Everything repeated itself with the second lapel.

(...a stabbed-in needle exactly as in that early poem by Tsvetaeva…)

I threw the needles out through the slots above the glass panes in the doors of the electric train rumbling along to Nezhin.
Where did they come from?
Stuck by the jealous mother like in that poem?
Or bought together with the coat from Alyosha? 
And (most perplexing) what had made me find them?

(...there’s still a lot of things that I will never understand.
Never…)

My visits to Zhomnir disturbed my mother-in-law.
Her main concern and worry were if they ever treated me to cooked sausage there. 
Apparently, she was afraid that such sausage could manipulate a person making a zombie of them like in the ‘The Matrix’ movie produced by Hollywood some thirty years later.

She didn’t know that I was from a new generation of robots being zombied and formatted with lines of printed text.
And how would you like, that Zhomnir fed me a book by Hesse in whose prose one paragraph can flow for a page and a half, Gaina Mikhailovna?
(...the power of printed text to affect the surrounding reality through the zombie-formatted me was more than once approved by facts from my personal experience. 

For example, in the toilet of Eera's parents, I find ‘At the Steer Wheel' magazine cut up for convenient hygienic use. 
Sitting on the potty I read scraps of an article about big Soviet trucks.
Then I leave the house for the institute and get scared!
It is impossible to cross the Red Partisans Street because of the roaring stream of KAMAZ’s and BELAZ’s.
There are hosts of them!

Of course, later they tried to put me off the track by irrelevant fibs of repair works on the Moscow highway and detouring of the traffic through Nezhin.
So the waited with their repair until I find the time to read a cutting from ‘At the Steer Wheel' magazine?.) 

Our relations with Gaina Mikhailovna developed along the traditional channel of the ‘son-in-law vs. mother-in-law’ scheme refracted by the intellectual level of the participants.

At first, we were getting along in a bright and sunny manner but after a week or so, she suddenly began to fasten up the collar of her dressing gown with a big safety pin. 
The robe was for home wear with a deep cut but I did not even notice it until that pin. 
Now the change left me no alternatives because between the pin and the first button under the cut there had formed a gap, and any gaping would naturally catch your eye. 

I did not ask her previous son-in-law (Tonya’s husband, Ivan, from the other bedroom) if he had observed the like symptoms before my coming to our parents-in-law’s and with what frequency.
I just had to control my looks.
Although, what was there to see?
The woman had faded long before.

Once we happened to be alone in the whole apartment, just she and I.
It was getting dark outside the window.
I was sitting on the folded sofa and she stood up leaning her back against the big mirror on the wardrobe door and telling me how she was being carried away to Germany in a freight train car.
She and many other young girls.

Clattering its iron wheels at the rail joints, the car was jostling its live load in shortened swings.
Everyone was frightened by the uncertainty of what would happen next and they felt very thirsty.
Some of the girls were crying.

The train stopped in the field.
The guards threw open the doors of the cars and shouted something, but she did not yet know German.
In a nearby hollow there ran a stream.
The guards showed with gestures they were allowed to approach the water. 
They happily rushed to the stream, drank and washed their faces.

Suddenly there were shouts and sharp reports of a machine gun round – one of the girls had attempted to run away and was killed. 
Back to the cars they were all passed by the dead.
The killed girl lay on her back with her eyes open and looked so beautiful...

Dusk thickened in the room, Gaina Mikhailovna stood with her palm pressed to the surface of the faded away mirror behind her, her head drooping over the murdered beauty.
Now she was there and felt herself that young sad Gaina.
I was sorry for her, and I was sorry for the killed girl.
I wanted to say or to do something only I did not know what I could say or do.
So I got up from the sofa and silently clicked the switch.

The light of the three electric bulbs under the ceiling smashed everything into spiky shards.
Instead of a frightened girl of Gaina, an elderly woman stood by the wardrobe with an absurd hole beneath her collar and unforgiving stare from under a strand of her dyed hair. 
Who had asked me to break the spell?
So I was the classically unacceptable bastard of a son-in-law...

Actually, I never felt a particular antagonism to the mother-in-law, yet I cannot help but note that your grandmother at times allowed her feeling to have the upper hand over her intellect.

She was irreconcilably anti-Semitic.
Probably, the years spent in the well-to-do German family were telling on her attitude to them those Jews. 
Folks tend to imitate the feelings of people around them.

The former Dean of the English Department, Antonyuk (who lost the position because of his guerrilla pencil-raids against the names of Bliznyuk and Gourevitch in the wall newspapers) remained a hero in her eyes.
She was indignant that there were Jews all around wherever you cast a look and resented her husband's indifference to her choler caused by the escalation of Zionism. 
 Sitting with a newspaper in front of his massive nose and, when it’s completely forgotten what exactly had been told to him, he would wake up to give you a reply:
‘A? Well.. yes, sure.’
And then again his nose would drowsily get buried in the paper.
That’s a supporter in life for you!

In her ardent struggle against Zionism, she even went to see a newly appointed rector – to open his eyes to the crying shame of each and every institute Department being seized by the proliferating tribes of Israel. 

(...it's ridiculous to approach the rector of the NGPI, named Arvat, a Jew from Odessa, with complaints of Jewish domination at the Nezhin institute. 
Eine lächerlich Wasserkunst!.
Or how it was said by Rilke?..)

But life did not stand still, Eera’s belly was growing.
The waves from your knees and heels had already started to roll over it.
Rather firm heels you had at that time, my nose remembers that.

And one day Eera with a scared voice told me to call her mother.
Gaina Mikhalovna came to the bedroom.
‘What is it, Mummy?’
On the smooth and immaculate statuette skin down there, under the already very large belly, ran uneven groovy marks.
‘Tightening.’
‘Does it pass after the childbirth?’
Her mother lowered her head with a frown, but nothing was said...

The final examination session had begun.
They hardly ask Eera any questions and told to give her record book at once to mark the assessment.

In the evening of June 14, Eera’s water broke and we walked to the maternity hospital.
They were surprised there that your mother came for childbirth on foot, Eera was taken to the prenatal ward and they brought me her clothes.
There I could no longer protect her.
I took the clothes home and went back to where I left Eera.

Two hundred meters from the maternity hospital a bulky KAMAZ truck with switched off headlights loomed by the sidewalk.
Only three red-rimmed beams were glowing on its cab top as a part of a dragon’s crest.
At my approach, KAMAZ suddenly jumped forward towards me and from a long puddle in the road, a dirty mesh of foam sprang out over the curb. 
I managed to jump up in time.
The foam croaked hissing with disappointment.
I landed on the wet sidewalk.
Get lost, you dragon! Back to your lair!
There’s no time to mess with you, today I’ve got a more important mission.
KAMAZ submissively roared off towards the Red Partisans street...

In the waiting room they told me there were no changes, the childbirth would be in the morning.

The maternity hospital was in a long one-story building with the entrance from its end.
Aside from the middle of the building stood a rounded gazebo wider than that at the construction battalion and without the pit in the center to receive cigarette butts. 
I went under its tin canopy, sat on the beams of the bench running along the round perimeter of the cemented floor and started to wait.
I had nothing to do without Eera in the empty narrow bedroom of her parents’ apartment.

A couple of people went from the gate to enter the maternity hospital.
Soon the man went back to the gate alone.
So, not only we were arriving on foot.
Probably, because it was such a day.
The full moon shone high above the hospital roof.
I smoked a joint and the moon turned into a distant exit from a long tunnel with pulsating walls.

The wide-open window of the delivery room looked at the gazebo. 
I figured out that it was it from the fine mosquito net which dimmed the light when they turned it on inside and screams of a woman in labor broke out into the night.

It was not Eera shouting, not her voice.
Probably, the one from the pair who came after us.

When the room became silent and the light was turned off, I went to the waiting room.
What if childbirth affected the voice?

They told me it was not the time yet.
I never stuffed another joint.
The one at the vigilance start remained the one and only that night.

When there were screams again I recognized the dear voice – it was Eera!
But then in the waiting room, they told me it was not time yet. 

They sent me to the window of the prenatal ward on the other side of the building.
Eera raised herself to the windowsill and from under her half-dropped eyelids, she incredulously looked that I was still there. 
She told me to leave, that the childbirth would be at nine.
She did not understand that I was protecting her from this world with its KAMAZ-dragons and savage paramedics.
‘Kerdun on the shift?’
‘No.’

I returned to the gazebo.
Sat there squeezing my shoulders with the hands resisting the chill of night.

In the whitish predawn twilight, the circle of the gazebo floor was suddenly crossed by an incomprehensible dark ball with a white cylinder in its front.
Only when it disappeared into the grass I guessed that it was a hedgehog whose muzzle got stuck in an ice-cream cone.
The rays of invisible sun stretched to the white clouds high above.
Soon it wouldn’t be so cold.
From the center of gazebo roof, a fine thread of a web bolted down with a heavy spider on its end. 
No sooner he touched the floor than the space of the gazebo was cut through with a sparrow flight in the direction that had been shown by the muzzle-covered hedgehog.
The spider followed them.

(...I can see signs, but—what a pity!—I cannot read them.
Spider, bird, hedgehog.
The three Magi?..)

In the delivery room, someone started screaming again. 
When the screams died down two women from behind the net called me to come up.
One of them held the baby in her uplifted hands.
Something was dangling between the tiny legs.
‘Son!’ I had time to think.
‘Congratulations to your daughter!' 
‘Navel cord,’ corrected I myself...

The mother-in-law met me with a smile and congratulations, she had already called the maternity hospital by phone.
I borrowed money from Tonya and ran to the Bazaar.
It was a serious banknote of 25 rubles, she hadn’t smaller ones by her at the moment.

I flounced about the Bazaar, buying up bouquets of roses.
Roses, I wanted only roses.
Until the clip of 25 rubles had run out.

Then I hurried back to the hospital embracing that bale of bouquets.
The one-legged cripple on his crutches by the five-story block of the mother-in-law smiled at me happily – he knew where I was hurrying to.

The nurse at the maternity hospital had to call for help two more her colleagues to take the flowers from the waiting room to the corridor. 
Later Eera told me that she was lying then on the gurney in that corridor and they heaped the roses over the sheet covering her but not for too long because flowers were not allowed in the wardrooms. 

Then nurses and midwives shared those bouquets to take them home.
One went to the paramedic Kerdun who came in the morning on her shift.
Who cares? The most important thing that you had been born. 

‘...a million, a million, a million of scarlet roses...’

(...Egyptologists are still arguing why the beautiful female faces of sphinxes are added with a hanging beard…) 

The solution was shown by Eera.
Though, first, she showed me you from behind the window pane. 
The white fabric tightly wrapped all around you left only a circle of the face with your eyes in an obstinate squint.

The same fabric covered Eera’s hair and half of her face was hidden with a white bandage, like by the bank robbers, only white.
She took you away somewhere and then returned to the window and said through the glass that your eyes were the bluest blue but that you were already asleep after feeding.

To say this she untied the upper strings of the bandage leaving the lower ones in place and the bandage hung under her chin.

(...a beautiful face and a beard under it!
The sphinxes have just fed their cubs! 
That’s what demonstrated the ancient Egyptians…)

Coming back to Red Partisans 26, I was appalled by the look of the door to our narrow bedroom.
How could I not see earlier all that dirt and mud splashes and that one long hair hanging from the mud clump? 
I heated some water and washed the door on both sides and then the window frame too, from inside.

When Tonya gave me the carriage of her children so that you would have where to sleep, I washed it as well taking into the yard under the bedroom window.
There I realized that it was the right thing to do when I picked a piece of dried baby cack out from under the folds of the hood. 

No, I did not say anything to anyone, nobody had anything to do with it, that was a part of sorting it out between me and the world, a single combat...

At the institute, Eera still had one more final examination.
Missing it she would have to wait a whole year and take it together with the following graduating course. 
However, you were born very conveniently – right after the previous exam and there remained a week for reading up between the examinations, allowing for your stay in the hospital, and three more days, because there were four groups on a course and they were not examined on the same day but one after another.

On the sixth day of your life, Eera came to the waiting room and said that you were already all right and the danger of jaundice, because of the different Rh factor in your parents, was over and you were ready to be taken home any moment if they allow.
I kicked up a stormy activity running to the head of the maternity hospital canvassing for an immediate discharge of you both on the grounds of the state examination to be taken by the mother.

The head began to hesitate and she said they needed a go-ahead from another maternity boss sitting in one of the lanes of the Shevchenko street. 
From an unfamiliar nurse, whose bicycle was waiting for the end of her shift leaned against the wall of the I borrowed it and drove over there. 

At the bus stops, under the bottomless sky with galactic-shaped clouds in the unreachable height, the end-of-day lines of passengers had already started accumulating.
The bike swept past like the besom of Margarita riding to the ball of Satan. 
When I jumped off it by the small maternity office lurking in a lane, the witch's son of a bitch kicked me in the groin with its back wheel and neighed mutely but spitefully.

I ran into the office to surprise two women peacefully awaiting the end of their working day.
Taming my breath I started the same negotiations.
They made a telephone call somewhere and flatly said – no discharge without BCG, they'd vaccinate you next day and then set us free. 

I drove back much slower, dejectedly fixing the bike’s chain that fell off so too often.
When the bicycle was returned to the owner I went to the waiting room to find Tonya there. 

I started convincing her zealously that we could easily kidnap Eera and the baby, only I had to go and fetch Eera’s clothes.
Tonya sprinkled me with the knitted belt of her jacket the way exorcist priests do when busy with their job.
I stopped scaring Tonya, though I knew perfectly well that if I did not get Eera out of there that day I would lose her.

Eera came to the room and, in turn with Tonya, explained it to me that just one day did not mean anything.
It was evening already.
I saw Tonya to my parents-in-law's, but I couldn't stay in the bedroom even with its thoroughly rinsed door. 

I returned back to the hospital but did not go to the gazebo. 
I hadn't got the nerve to hear the shrieks and howling of women in childbirth. 
So I went to the night watch.
Like the last in the field from the squad of guarding knights of Uncle Chernomor.

I walked in a slow, delayed pace because there was still a whole night ahead.
It turned out to be so dark that when I walked past the five-story block of Jzonmir I stepped in a deep hole-puddle in the sidewalk with my right foot.
Phui!
So deftly dodged the dragon but next to the lair of Laban I really screwed up.

I went further and under the water pump across the road from the locked gates of Nezhin Vegetable Cannery I had the foot ablution and washed the sock too.
A cavalcade of buses brightly lit from inside came round the turn to the Progress Plant.
They rumbled past completely empty of passengers.
I firmly squeezed the water out of my sock and put it on.

So, in one dry sock and the other wet, I went to the station.
A knight vigilant should not stop in his watch round.

I went a circle in the semi-dark and empty ticket-office hall.
Another circle was done in the waiting room with silent motionless people seated on the benches.
Past the locked canteen-restaurant, I went to the second floor to coast through waiting rooms up there. 

Never before had I noticed how strangely change people’s eyes at night.
Not everyone's though, but with some, their eyes turn uncanny and glazed. 
Those with such eyes got startled with my appearance.
They tried to hide the unnatural glassiness of their eyes, but I could easily discern them in the sitting rows of unsuspecting passengers half-asleep in the night silence of the station.
Behave yourselves, glassy-eyed!
The guard is on the watch.

The rain caught up with me under the lights on the empty traffic bridge.
A quiet summer rain.
I did not intend to go to Pryluki, so I turned back and went to Red Partisans.
The rain was not increasing and not ceasing either.
We strolled at the same slow pace. 

The door was opened by Ivan Alexeyevich.
Gaina Mikhailovna was peeping from the dark of the unlighted living room.
‘Where are you roving? There’s rain outside.’
‘It’s warm.’
‘Maybe, I’ll beat you?’
‘It’s not worth it.’

In the bedroom, I dropped all wet clothes and lay naked. 
As in all previous night without Eera, I spread her nightdress full length and hugged around so that I could protect her even without her by my side.

Much later, I learned that the family concluded I had been out to whores on that night...

Next day in the afternoon I carried you from the hospital, wrapped in a quilted silk blanket and some frilled tulle.
Eera walked alongside, with a bouquet of flowers, which Tonya had bought in advance.
But they were not roses.

Her last examination Eera passed with another group from her course.
I waited for her by the columns of the high porch and, embracing by the waist, helped her down the steep steps.
She wore a yellow knitted jacket with three-quarter sleeves. 
The head of my group, Lyda, who happened about, was watching us from aside and smiling sentimentally. 

That yellow jacket I liked and got by chance.
Eera told me then that they brought goods to the department store in the main square and sent to see what they were selling.
A usual at such occasions the store was filled with a dense crowd.
The jacket was the last one and exactly Eera’s size.
While I was happy with the good luck it was grabbed by some girl and her mother.
Sneaky villagers!
The girl tried the jacket on and looked inquiringly at her mother who was holding her raincoat.

To the department store, I was accompanied by Slavic. 
We stepped aside and started to exchange comments.
‘Not bad, but the sleeves are the way too short.'
‘Let’s look for something else.’
The mother shook her head and the girl reluctantly took off the jacket.
I grabbed it directly and sent Slavic to knock out the check.
Eera even liked that it was a three-quarter jacket. 
All that was before you...

And for your birth, following the time-honored beautiful Slavic tradition, I had to treat my friends to ‘magarich'.

In the restaurant ’Seagull’ of the same-named hotel in the main square, Slavic, Twoic and I shared a couple of decanters of vodka.
The waitress had a skirt of white and black stripes on and Twoic liked when I called it a stringy piece of cloth.
He demanded a toast.

‘It's not just a birth,' announced I, 'but a start of new life and life is a transition from one form to another. 
 Let's drink to that from now on we will be filling only beautiful forms.' 
Twoic started to carp that idea of form transitions I stole from Thomas Mann.
He also had read ‘Joseph and his Brothers’.

My next toast was a girl with beautiful blue eyes, that is to you. 
Twoic pulled a clever look on his peasant mug and started a lecture about somewhat causal genes—a smartie from the Biology Department—and that the color would change in a month to brown, possibly dark-brown.
Some bio-bastard with his causal genes!.

Before handing out the diplomas and appointments to the work-places, they summoned all the institute graduates to the assembly hall in the New Building.
We had to sit through a usual blah-blah about keeping high the NGPI honor wherever sent by our appointment. 
Than a black-haired stranger took the floor and said that each of us when entering the hall was given a sheet of paper and a pencil.
Right?
Now, it should be admitted that not everything was straight and good at our schools.
So, let us write what we, the graduates, did not like at the time of our school practices, or even earlier, or even when we had still been studying at school.
When some teacher behaved incorrectly, in our opinion, or allowed themselves incorrect statements.
To make it easier to start, let’s use the phrase ‘And I still remember how...’.
And then it would go on by itself. Okay?

He finished his briefing and I sat stunned with awe and realization how deeply backward I had fallen.
The KGB had obviously upgraded to the conveyor system in the production of secret collaborators.
Hundreds of rats in just one sitting!
And no need for the bait of a spy school.

(...in each of us there lurks a small frightened animal hidden deep inside and thinking logically:
‘If I don’t write they can cancel my diploma or give the appointment to the worst of the holes.
It’s better to write – one time does not count.’
But that time of no account is, actually, just the start.
Later, in the hole you were appointed to, they will come up and show you your essay, and dictate the next…)

Okay, bitches, I’ll write for you!

In the back of each seat in the assembly hall, there was installed a hinged rectangular piece of plastic. 
I unfastened the one in the back of the seat before me, put the clean sheet of paper on the even plastic surface and wrote:
‘And I remember how in the fourth grade my class teacher, Seraphima Sergeevna, stated:
“Well done, Sehrguey! You collected most of the waste paper.”
And I was filled with pride and joy.’

(...I signed my final report to the KGB with my real name and I am proud of it till now…)

The great discovery of Karl Marx about the emergence of surplus value, remained, as it, unfortunately, is, not pushed to all of its potential limits.
He noted correctly, that a laborer some part of his working time toils for himself, and another part for the factory owner.
Good fellow, Karl, hit the bulls-eye!
But that’s not all there is there to it.
The main (yet unnoticed) trick, lays in the fact, that it is impossible to determine who exactly the laborer toils this or that part of a split second for.
And this unperceived (still indisputable) truth is applicable not only to the methods of production but to any other sphere of human activities as well. 

(Hopefully, I’m not advancing too fast and you have time to stick done your notes?
Okay, reach to the full-stop while I’m opening the second bottle.)

Hence, we can safely state, that there are no bad people in the world, but there are no good people either.
An elusive, uncatchable fraction of a second separates good from evil.
So, you think that guy is a good man?
I love your naivety! 
Yes, you’re still alive because of you just turned up in the right part of the second.
Half an hour earlier or later and that vampire would drop you as a lifeless corpse with your blood system sucked-up dry and lymph nodes hanched to shreds!

Or let’s take those same witches queuing to be burned at the stake and illuminate the darkness of the Middle Ages.
The gloomy blockheads could not understand that they were burning not the right ones and at the wrong moment.

My point is, no matter how – at the stake, on the pile, in the guillotine, on the electric chair, in the noose, by the wall… well, whatever!.. they always execute the innocent.
These are not those ones, those were not these. 
But even those, at the moment of wrong-doing, were simply order-executing tools.

Whose order?
Who were they toiling for?
Well, if I knew the answer, would I be living here, eh?

One thing is clear, though.
Between the tool engaged at the operating end and the don of mafia lies a chain of several links making the ‘who’ practically untraceable.
Because, if we paraphrase the favorite expression of my uncle Vadik, which he picked at the history lessons in School 13:
‘a zombie of my zombie is not my zombie’…) 

Hearing your heartbreaking cry from the bedroom I rushed there and was just in time.
You were wriggling in the carriage by the open leaf in the window and your grandmother crouching over you went on with her incantation:
‘Little angel! Little angel!’
And you were literally getting torn apart in screams.
‘Gaina Mikhailovna! She’s not an angel but a girl!’

She replied with a look where glinted the malice of that who had sent her.
But lacking arguments to refute my statement she silently left.
I knew for sure that to persuade a baby with still infirm psyche and feebly orienting in the world that she was an angel was wrong.
And more so under the open window!
Like, fly to where it’s nice, where angels like you flutter happily around!

I started to convince you that you were a girl named Lily and no angel at all.
You still kept crying but not so desperate as before. 
The soul was not being wrenched in efforts to escape the body.

But what was wrong?
I put you on the bed and unwrapped the swaddle.
You cried arching your infant torso.
The reason was found on the soles of tiny feet – whitish arachnoid fibers like in their texture to those rascal marking fluffs on my camel coat.
I rinsed them off.
Blinking your blue eyes with surprise, you calmed down. 
I swaddled you back again and carried to the carriage.
You fell asleep...

Your swaddles were ironed mostly by me so that I would keep everything under control and watched closely. 
And it was me to hang them after washing on the common linen ropes in the yard.
They ran from the central pillar like spokes from a wheel hub.
Beneath those ropes, I learned that I had allies in this world. 

It’s highly unlikely that I would solve the problem of hanging swaddles the right way if I were alone.
I mean it, really, which way to put them on the rope – face down or back down?
I put the first one this way, the second upside down.
And at that moment a white pigeon came from above, lighted on the central pillar and cooed in protest.
Oh, really? Thank you, friend! I'll keep the instruction! 
Since then I was hanging a whole load of swaddles homogeneously... 

Zhomnir had suddenly lost interest in my translations from Maugham.
He stopped his cheerful threats to take them one of these days to ‘matchmaking’ in Kiev.
They were substituted with languid explanations that it was necessary to take into account the ongoing changes in conjuncture.
That the following year there would be the centenary of the birth of another English writer.
Translations from that one would be much easier to shove through.
And Maugham, actually, was a gay…

Well, let’s say, rendering the story about a suicide pianist I could myself figure out his orientation.
However, in what gutter would this here best of the worlds be today without the gay of Tchaikovsky?
Either Maugham or nothing!
Alexander Vasilyevich shrugged his shoulders.

In the living room at Red Partisans, I, in the presence of Gaina Mikhailovna, complained to Eera about Zhomnir’s double-dealing.
They both knew about my ambiguous ambitions of becoming a literary translator.
Eera started pathetic exclamations, and my mother-in-law, without any comments, went out to Tonya’s bedroom and returned with a powder box.
She opened it, powdered her face in front of the mirror in the wardrobe door and took it back in the same tacit manner.
That’s all.

In the evening Zhomnir rang the doorbell and invited me to go out with him into the yard. 
His bicycle leaned against the house wall by the entrance to the stairwell.

Under the dark foliage of the thick cherry crowns behind the common linen ropes, twilight was already gathering and crawling towards the hung laundries. 
From the neighboring apartment block sounded the Eagles’ Hotel California:

‘Warm smell of colitas rising up in the air...’

I did not know at that time what a tragically creepy end the song had and simply was getting on high from the guitar part…

Zhomnir obviously envied the atmosphere around but then started to talk business.
My translations were no longer just scribbling, but still only a beta version. 
He did not insist on changing the author, but let it be upgraded to an alpha. 

He left and I respectfully admired the skills of the old school.
With all their ignorance about the textual formatting of the world and with the naive belief in bewitching through the cooked sausage, yet just a single dusting was enough to seize Zhomnir by the gills! 
Well done, mother-in-law!

Apart from the security considerations, the swaddle ironing was needed to pass the time.
Eera, like a mother of a newborn, was exempt from working off for her diploma.
I got an appointment to somewhere in Transcarpathia.
The exacter location was not of much concern to me because I did not plan to work at the school in any place at any time. 
And Gaina Mikhailovna (since I was so brave) came up with an idea to follow the example of Komsomol members from the earlier generations.
They recklessly went to erect new cities which were not yet on the map.
And, by the way, there was an article in a newspaper that nearby Odessa they started to build a new city-port of Yuzhny.

It was decided that I would go there as soon as you were one month old because for Eera alone it was still hard to keep you. 
So I was whiling away the pre-launch month with the swaddles and walking the carriage with you sleeping in.
Only I was instructed strictly to never move the tulle cover fixed on the hood put up to screen the baby inside.
And at the end of the month, when you would have passed the medical examination the tulle could be removed and substituted with a safety pin to keep you safe from the evil eye...

My brother Sasha came on a visit from Konotop and you had your first trip to the Count’s Park.
Eera and Slavic joined us also.
By the park lake, Slavic and I sparked a joint but my brother did not play with the grass. 
We returned through the narrow gate next to the building of the Musical Department.
It had an iron strip welded across, some ten inches above the ground, impeding the passage of the carriage.

I languishingly asked Slavic for help to move the carriage over, but no sooner had he reached out to grab it from the front than Sasha yelled at him brutally:
‘Get off with you!’
Slavic cowedly obeyed and you were carried over the stile by me and Sasha.
I felt pleased and proud to have such a brother and also glad for you having such sort of an uncle who did not surrender his niece to Slavic.

Your next visit to the Park took place on the arrival of Eera’s brother from Kiev.
Igor came together with his wife which kept nagging him all the time and he, in a soft tone, smoothed away the spiky wrinkles that she kept turning out.
I then thought it was because of her PMS but later learned that she had got that PMS for life without a break.

At the walk, she kept opening her umbrella every other minute and then the rain started to drizzle. 
When she did it for the dozenth time Eera also got it about the cause and effect and asked her not to open the umbrella anymore. 
Igor’s wife was happy to be noticed and appreciated, left the umbrella alone and on our way back there was no rain...

In his family, Ivan Alexeyevich enjoyed the handle of Prince and he was pleased with it.
A natural reaction for a peasant son getting to princes.
And he looked that too, especially when, well nourished and imposing, he sat in a white tank shirt and blue sportswear pants over a newspaper wide open in his hands.
So the handle was, like, a compliment to tickle his pride and he deserved it because he was a getter. 

In the era of deficit not only wedding suits were hard to be acquired but different other types of products too.
So my father-in-law was getting them.
Once he fetched and dropped in the kitchen a whole sack of buckwheat, by the battery of the central heating under the windowsill.
In the corner to the left from the window, there was installed the gas stove, the titan for water heating loomed in the right so that sack of buckwheat filled the center completing the composition to advantage. 
And that was a righteous lump of pride too because of folks had to go for a special trip to Moscow to buy that product and suddenly in a kitchen of provincial Nezhin a whole sack of it! 

(...same sort of pride that some people get from a hunting trophy, like a pair of tusks, a sword sawed off a fish, or such thick branching… well, ahem… that, in general, also fix on the wall…)

Well, okay, if so is your disposition, then you tickle your pride for a week, let’s say two, or even a month circumventing the f-f.. fabulous sack but already even the mother-in-law started to grumble and in return:
‘A? Well, yes...’
And again he got buried himself in the newspaper.

But then in the uneven pile of newspapers next to the TV on the table, a certain headline caught my eye. 
I did not read the article itself but the headline prompted that it was on some archaeological subject. 
I just liked the headline for some reason.
So short and sweet, and to the point.
I even recollected the toilet room in the hostel.

I picked the paper up and folded it in a certain way so that only the headline would be seen. 
In the evening I took it to the kitchen and with a caressing gesture—there even was some gayish tint to it—I put the newspaper on the sack of buckwheat.
Going out of the kitchen I put the light off and went to bed, leaving in the dark the sack headlined ‘The Prince’s Tomb’.
I mean, as a son-in-law I was a classic ‘f-f..bastard!’

The day before I was leaving to participate in the erecting a new city, I went to Konotop to see Lenochka who was resting in the pioneer camp by the Seim. 
She confirmed that I was her father and the caretaker of her platoon allowed us to go out of the campgrounds.

In the pine forest Lenochka picked up a long gray feather of an unknown bird and I thrust it into her smooth hair and it stayed there as if fixed.

(...Indians are no fools – such feathers make a person a part of the free wild world, establishing involvement, contact and tacit mutual understanding…)

When we returned to the camp civilization, a gust of wind ran up from behind and softly took the feather out of her hair to drop it down on the pine needles.
She did not even notice.





