~~~ The Youth ~~~

Many of my classmates did not return to school after that summer, they moved or went to different technical and vocational schools.
Kuba entered the Odessa Naval School, Volodya Sherudillo – the Vocational School 4, aka GPTU-4, which, for some reason, the Konotopers unofficially named ‘the seminary’ and its students, respectively, ‘the seminarists’.
Skully wanted to enter some Mining School in Donetsk, but eventually became a student of the Konotop Railway Transportation College.
The losses in the parallel class were no less and we were all united into a single ninth grade...

On the first day of school after the ceremonial lining-up and the bell signaling the start of the academic year and its first lesson as well, our unified class entered Valera Parasyuk, aka ’Quak’.

He was blonde and already a tenth grader but, running after some girl from the former parallel, he came like just to say ‘hello’ to the guys.
The Ukranian Language teacher Fedosya Yakovlevna, aka ‘Feska’, followed him with the straight parting in her colorless hair braided into a pitiful crown.
Indicating the door, she told him to leave the classroom.
Quak complied, but went another, his own way – he climbed onto the windowsill and jumped into the yard flashing his black polished shoes for a goodbye. 

The Chemistry teacher, Tatyana Fyodorovna, had been always exemplifying his shoes before us:
‘If a guy’s shoes shine, then he’s looking after himself. Follow the example of Parasyuk whose shoes are always polished!’

Fedosya Yakovlevna, aka Feska, closed the open window after Valera Parasyuk, aka Quak and called the class not to pay any attention to him because he had been already transferred to School 14 (which also was in the Settlement) because he lived closer to that school and the teachers of ours would, consequently, have less headache... 

The best way for people to know and rub along each other is working together.
 After a week of classes, the senior grades were told to come to school on Saturday with buckets, we were going to help the kolkhoz in Podlipnoye village with harvesting.

The day was glorious – a warm September day with a bright sun in the blue sky.
We came on the edge of a cornfield and were instructed in the harvesting technique.
Pull the ear off the stem, tear away the long leaves of its sheathing and drop it in your bucket.
With the bucket filled up, take it to the mutual cob of ears and pour your share onto it.
That was called 'patronage help' to a collective farm.

Each patronizer was put before a row of corn stalks to simply go along it and harvest the ears up to the other end of the field.
And off we went in the mutual burst under the clink of tin buckets mixed with cheerful students' exclamations, the admonitions of caring teachers, and bangs of thunderflashes thrown high in the sky...

Soon I noticed my lagging behind the general progress.
Taking another bucket to the cob I paid attention that not all of the cornrows were absolutely clear of corn ears.
So they eschewed explicit explaining that we were not supposed to harvest each and every ear but selectively choose the best of the best, eh? 

I corrected my priorities and in no time caught up with the main body of the patronizers, got ahead and overtook the avant-garde party.
With me, the avant-garde became four guys. 

The people ahead of the common mass had a number of advantages.
You did not need to return to the mutual cobs of the harvested corn ears.
As soon as the bucket got filled with ears, you poured them on the ground becoming the founder of a new cob for those coming later to contribute.
Two of the guys in the avant-garde party chose the path of least resistance throwing the ears from their rows in all directions not to bother with cleaning them of leaves.
I did not follow their best practices because the end of the field could already be seen.
We went out to a fallow field and for another half-an-hour lay in the grass before the general mass approached and joined us, the super-productive harvesters...

In September, the Arkhipenkos moved to the Ryaboshapka Street near the RepBase from which Uncle Tolik received an apartment in a five-story block.
The mode of life became more spacious after our parent moved to sleep in the kitchen...

In the hutta yard appeared a new tenant – Grigory Pilluta.
He had served his ten years for a murder and returned to the sweet home of his and his parents’.

The dark turf of hair hid his forehead and his eyes looked constantly down or aside. 
Silent and sullen he passed from the wicket to his porch.
The Pillutikha’s concerts did not stop with his return from jail.
Though, one day passing under their kitchen window I heard his rude attempt to shut up the stream of her curses directed at the kitchen wall...

Father woke me up after the midnight.
The room was half lighted with the desk lamp.
Mother stood next to him, and Sasha and Natasha looked from under their blankets.
Father told that Pilluta was breaking into our door with a knife and I had to climb down through the window of the room and bring two axes from the workshop in the lean-to returning the same way. 
There was no time for dressing up – through the dark kitchen came the sounds of blows at the door on the porch and thick drunken cries addressed to Mother:
‘Open it, bitch! I’ll get your guts out!’

I quickly brought the required tools and Father and I stood by the door quaking under the blows of yelling Grigory Pilluta. 
How long would the rim lock last? 
We stood in our underpants and tank-shirts with axes in our hands.
‘Seryozha,’ said Father in a keyed up voice,’when he breaks in do not hit with the blade, use the butt!’
I was scared and at the same time wanted Pilluta to break in sooner at last. 

He did not do it.
In the darkness of the yard were heard Pillutikha’s wailing and persuading male voice.
It was Yura Plaksin, Grigory Pilluta’s childhood buddy from the hutta in the Gogol Street opposite the water pump.
He took the drunk away with him.
We left the axes in the veranda and went to sleep on.

In the morning I saw that the gray paint on the front door was scratched and stabbed with a knife.
It’s good it did not happen in winter with the additional window frames inserted for warmth.
They had no hinges, so how would I get out to the lean-to?

Then Yura Plaksin came pleading not to inform the precinct militiaman about the incident.
One of the axes stayed in the veranda for a long time, until Grigory Pilluta moved somewhere in the city from his mother’s hutta to keep away from the temptation.
Stupid indeed of his mother to wind him up and then run to Yura Plaksin for help so that her boy would not get locked up again.

Maybe, he had other reasons for moving, how could I know?
Another guy’s life is a dark abyss for those from outside.
Later I sometimes met Grigory in the city but never more in the yard of our hutta...

With the Pillutikha's death, the population of the hutta increased sharply because Grigory sold his parental home to newcomers from Siberia. 
That did not mean at all that they were Siberians themselves.
You could go there from any Republic; get recruited for work and – go.
The so-called ‘chasing the long ruble’ because of the salaries in those uninhabited Taiga places were very high.
Folks were coming from there with their suitcases packed with money to the gills, they said.
If they could manage it, of course.
As a saying ran – ‘the longer the ruble, the shorter the life’.

One guy from the Settlement recruited to a mine beyond the Urals and six months later he was brought back.
In that mine, he was in charge of the machinery and equipment repair. 
Something stopped to work there, they switched the contraption off and he crawled in to see what's up.
At that moment the switch was turned on (they had forgotten he was inside or something) and the mechanism chopped him so finely that he was sent back to his parents in a zinc coffin in the form of minced meat.

In the Ballet Studio of Nina Aleksandrovna, he was a leading dancer. 
Such a tall brunette.
When performing the Moldovan ‘Jock’ he jumped higher than others with his legs wide apart in the air to slap the ballet boots with his hands.
And the short silk waistcoat for Moldovan dances with a pattern of flashing spangles suited his long black hair...

The newcomers who bought Pilluta’s half of the hutta had been recruited to Siberia not from Konotop and even not from Ukraine.
They spoke Russian and did not understand many local words.
There were four of them – two childless couples who divided the half of the hutta among themselves. 

The somewhat older pair lived in the part next to ours and the younger ones got the part with two additional windows looking into the street.
Maybe, that’s why they were a little more cheerful than the older pair.
Although, in contrast to demised Pillutikha, the elders too looked quite friendly. 

Our immediate neighbor, the husband in the senior couple, had started the renovation of the brick stove in their kitchen and found a treasure hidden in its chimney. 
He distributed to Sasha and Natasha, and the children from the neighboring hutta of the Turkovs the bills of unprecedented banknotes from his find.

They amazed me with their face value; I had always thought that the 25-ruble note with the plaster bust of Lenin was the biggest piece of money imaginable, but no! 
The Turkovs kids played with the bank notes of one hundred and even five hundred rubles, each the size of a handkerchief with antique sculptures and royal portraits in oval frames and with a vignette-like signature of the Finance Minister of the Russian Empire. 

The money of the Ukranian Central Rada from the times of the Civil War was also played, not as picturesque though, but the curls in the signature of Lebid-Yurchik were not inferior to those of the tsarist minister. 

In my class there also was a guy with his last name Yurchik and named Sehrguey like me.
Only he was taller and when our class lined-up in a PE lesson he stood the second.
All the same, he hardly was a relative of the Minister Yurchik because he lived in Podlipnoye. 
Most likely, they were just namesakes.

When father came from work the neighbor called him to show the box he found the treasure in and the exact place in the chimney where he took it from. 
Then Father returned to our kitchen stood in the middle of it and thoughtfully said: 
‘But there was not just funny money there.’
He looked again at the stack of banknotes on the table and started to recall his village relative on the maternal side. 

That guy lived under the tsarist regime and mastered the skill of printing paper money. 
He had a special machine for the purpose.
Life smiled on him until his business failure caused by unthoughtful impatience.
Entertaining his brother on a visit from the city, he bought vodka from the village store. 
The salesman saw blue paint on his fingers from a five-ruble note he got – the brothers so hurried to celebrate their meeting that they did not let the money dry properly. 
In short, the printer man was exiled to Siberia with confiscation of property.
And his wife followed him, like those wives of the revolutionary Decemberists. 
‘That’s what love is’, Mother said in an attempt of adding a pinch of sentimental spice to the all too earthy story.
‘Bullshit!’ retorted Father. ‘She just had figured it out that with such a chiseller she’d be better off in Siberia than home.’
He chuckled and I felt also pleased that I had a cunning counterfeiter sitting in my family tree.
Even the fact that it was long ago was not too telling on the pleasure. 
Generally, anything from before the Revolution seemed to me no less distant than the stern old times of the epic heroes.
Though in the days of Gorynych the Dragon they did not print paper money, of course. 

A week later Father’s assumption was indirectly confirmed.
The husband from the younger couple (not so cheerful as usual) shared with Father the news that his friend had unexpectedly left in an unknown direction.
Both he and his wife quitted quietly their jobs and did not even say goodbye.
Friendship is a great thing, but hands off my tobacco, buddy!

Soon the younger, already depressed couple, left too.
The Pilluta’s part of the hutta emptied again and for long...

Because of the training at the regional camp of Komsomol activists, I was elected the Head of Komsomol Committee, aka Komsorg, of School 13.
A week later I did not attend classes for several days.
In a commission of five Komsorgs, I attended the reporting sessions of the Komsomol Committees in the city schools under the supervision of the Second Secretary of the City Komsomol Committee. 
Besides me, there were two more activists trained at the camp in the Sumy City – the guitar player and one of the girls.
The reporting sessions were killing with their boredom because everywhere the very same things were said the very same way with the very same words. 
And then the Second Secretary invariably demanded from us, the commission members, to take the floor with critical remarks. 
The guitar player was good at it, trained to be satisfied with just two chords he knew...

The Komsomol of School 13 never parted with their glorious pioneer traditions and continued to participate in the All-School Scrap Metal Collecting.

Every autumn the long schoolyard was divided into the sectors, starting from the two-story 'Cherevko’s school' at the gate up to the workshop building.
The sectors were assigned to different classes so that they knew where to dump the scrap metal collected by them.

The classes competed, the piles of rusty stuff grew and weighed from time to time until, eventually, the scrap metal was taken away somewhere.
The winning classes were awarded the Honor Certificates.

Of course, we hardly cared for those certificates.
But it was interesting to get together with your whole class and …—well, not all of your class, actually, but those who would turn up—and…

And with a pair of pull-barrows rattling their iron wheels on the cobblestones of the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street and creaking tiredly along the dust'n'dirt in the rest streets we ventured the Settlement in search of scrap metal. 
And where to look for it?
Well, some classmates had neighbors who were happy to get rid of a heap of perennial metal layers in the corner of their yard. 
Drive in your pull-barrow, load it all!

However, rusty basins, sofa springs, and bent nails were a too lightweight addition to the authority of your class's scrap heap. 
And the yard cleaning neighbors happened not very often.
What? That trash behind the shed? Right, it’s rusty through and through. Yet, who knows? One day might come handy. A length of wire could tie up a plank in the fence that’s so rotten that a nail would crash it to pieces.

Therefore, the newly created collective of our ninth grade went with their pull-barrows for a free search along the Plant wall in the Professions Street. 
Like vultures in search of prey.

At the far end of the Plant, where the tracks of the marshaling yard innumerable multiplied, we circled around an obviously nobody’s wheel pair of a railway car.
But you couldn't load the multi-ton wheels on a pair of pull-barrows, otherwise, we'd win in scrap metal collecting. 

We searched further, along with the railway tracks, also to no avail. 
Only in a wide concrete tube on the way, the guys discovered a watermelon and a box of grapes.
Probably, the station dockers lifted the fruits from some car in the waiting freight train and hid for a while, suggested Volodya Sakoon from the former parallel.

We looked around – just motionless rows of freight trains stood silently on all the sides.
Someone had a knife to cut the watermelon.
It did not open even when gashed all the way around because of being too big for the knife length.
When hit against the wall of the concrete tube, the watermelon broke up in two, but its core, the so-called ‘soul', remained in one of the halves. 
Red, sugary, stitched with dark brown seeds soul.

I would never expect such a swiftness from myself, but it was I who dealt the ‘falcon strike’ with both hands, snatching the soul from the watermelon.
A little recovering from bewilderment with unexpected glibness, I generously refused to partake in the sharing of the remaining watermelon parts.
The guys cut them into slices, but I ate out of my own palms, the ball of watermelon pulp dripping the sweetest juice.
We left the grapes to the dockers who stole them. 
Almost half the box.
So that they did not get hurt.

An hour later, following the lead from an acquaintance, we stroke it rich on a scrap metal deposit, although, in a completely different area.
In the fence of iron pipes between the Bazaar and the ‘seminary’, aka Vocational School 4, there was a hole through which we dragged out pipe offcuts, pretty long and so many that they made a good load for both pull-barrows.

The next day the ‘seminary’ House Manager came to our school, identified their pipes in our scrap metal heap and took them away.
As it turned out, that was the material for training the ‘seminarists’ to work on a lathe.
But our Principal, Pyotr Ivanovich, did not ever scold us.
And what for?
Who could have guessed that the important material would be dumped into the nettle thicket?
However, when giving it a careful thought, there might be good reasons for anything…

It’s just my lightning-like seizure of the watermelon soul that remained for me something inexplicable.

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my misfortunes or joys, ups, and downs, all my silly mistakes or insights sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you lying in a tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lapping of the river named Varanda…) 

Unpredictable is the beginning of friendships. 
You go home after school and there Vitya Cherevko, your new classmate from the former parallel also walks along the Nezhin Street.
‘Oh! How’s that you’re here?’
‘Ah. Goin’ to Vladya. He lives in the Forge Street.’
‘Hmm. I’m with you.’

Since that day I had two classmate-friends: Chuba, aka Vitya Cherevko, and Vladya, aka Volodya Sakoon.

Vladya’s forehead was covered with the long forelock of greasy chestnut-color hair that started from a long parting over his right ear.
Two or three half-ripe pimples on his cheeks were redeemed by the beauty of his large expressive eyes – any girl would be envious.

Chuba’s hair was black and slightly curly, and his eyes were pale blue.
He had a healthy blush in his cheeks and a little spray of freckles over his neat nose.

Vladya’s hutta porch served the place for our meetings.

He lived with his mother, Galina Petrovna, in a room and a kitchen.
A box-table, an iron bed, and the stove filled up the kitchen to the utmost – nothing else could be fitted in, except for the hooks by the door to hang coats. 
In the equally narrow room there stood a wardrobe, a wider bed, a table with three chairs pushed under it (otherwise you couldn’t squeeze by) and an up-stand shelf with a TV.
Both kitchen and the room had a window in ages long need of paint.
The blind wall opposite the windows separated their home from the neighbors’ half of the hutta.

Galina Petrovna had the job of a nurse at the Plant Kindergarten in between the Plant Park and the road diving into the Under-Overpass tunnel.
Sometimes her cousin came to visit her.
She called him Pencil or Karandella, depending on her current mood.
He brought a bottle of wine with him.
Maybe, he indeed was a relative, there was something common about his and Vladya’s eyes.

Vladya’s two elder brothers, who looked different to each other, and to Vladya as well, were separately traveling around the Soviet Union in search of a long ruble.

Vladya was very popular among the guys not only from the Forge but also the Smithy Streets. 
He knew how to ‘drive a fool’.
In the Settlement parlance ‘fool driver’ was someone who deceived you with an invented story for their private purposes or just entertainment.

For example, he drove a fool about how in Scotland they threw a log in competition, told on behalf one of those men:
‘Well, that guy did not get it that I had already thrown it and it caught him right on the pate.
And he kicked the bucket.
What else could he do in that situation?’
And he closed one eye and drowsily rolled the other one up under its eyelid.

Or he shared a local news how Kolyan Pevriy, completely well-oiled, took a lamppost for a passer-by.
He started with bullying, then demanded a cigarette, but the one who he talked to showed neither reaction nor any respect and Kolyan fought him… 
Couldn't fell, though… 

And on one of the evenings, a guitar appeared on the porch, brought by Vasya Markov, and Vladya sang a song about the Count and his daughter Valentina, and the Page violin player.

That’s when I got into the servile bondage and begged him to teach me too.
He replied that he himself was learning from Quak to who I’d better turn directly.
Only that I did not have a guitar and he couldn’t give me the one he played because it was Vasya’s who did not allow to farm it out or let anyone play...

If you really want something, the dream would come true in seconds, plus or minus a day or two.
There was a guitar!

Vadik Glushchenko, aka Glushcha, from the same Forge Street, sold me his guitar!
And at the store price too, peeping in the soundhole you could read on the sticker:
‘7 rubles 50 kopecks. Leningrad Factory of Musical Instruments.’

Mother almost immediately procured the needed sum.
True enough, the plastic handle on the third string peghead was missing, but later Father took off the tuning machine, smuggled it to his work and welded a neat iron rivet in place of the lost one.

Quak gave me a crumpled sheet from a copybook with the invaluable exhaustive list and tablature of all the guitar chords in existence: ‘the small starlet’, ‘the big starlet’, ‘the poker’, and ‘the barre’.
Just a little more and I would start singing about the favorite daughter of the Count.

But I hadn't been allowed that tiny stretch of time. 
Vladya’s brother, Yura, brought him a brand new six-string guitar and I again remained hopelessly behind because on the six-stringed one there were no ‘pokers’ and no ‘starlets’.
I had to do cuts in the nut of the guitar for the six-string layout instead of the seven-string, aka Russian, one.

In October it was still warm and Galina Petrovna arranged Vladya’s birthday for him and his classmates in the open air.
The table from the room was taken out to the front garden strip and it turned out to be a sliding table.
It was put between the hutta and the wooden shed with latticed veranda panes, which served a summer kitchen and summer bedroom.

At that table, I for the first time drank wine. 
What a great feeling!
The world around got enveloped with the thinnest curtain made of translucent, like dragonfly wings, flower petals with tiny veins. 
Beautiful friends sat around me—the best people in the worlds—and we conducted the wittiest conversations and Vladya's mother laughed in such a ringing tone, and the shadows under the bush of red currant grew vaguely deeper. 

With the onset of winter, our classmate Lyuba Serduke also had a birthday and those who passed two rubles to our Class Monitor, Tanya Krasnozhon, came to the hutta of the birthday girl.
Until then we arranged parties only at school under the supervision of Albina Grigoryevna.
We drank lemonade and after that moved the desks into one corner of the classroom and played ‘the stream’ and the guys from higher grades opened the door and peeped, but Albina wouldn’t let them in.

(...it's nice to hold a girl's hand in yours and pull her in 'the stream' through the tunnel of hands joined in pairs above your head, unless, of course, the hand you pull is not sweaty and then, becoming a part of the tunnel, you have to wait until Vera Litviniva will free and pull you in her wake. 
She’s a nice girl, but Sasha Uniat from the tenth grade is after her in earnest.
He’s a good guy, but you can never say, anyone might turn jealous sometimes...)

And in Lyuba's hutta on the freshly painted floor in the large dining room there stood a long table covered with a white tablecloth and filled with salads, pork jelly, and lemonade. 
When all the participants to the party gathered and Tanya handed the birthday girl the present she bought for the collected rubles, Lyuba's parent put on their coats and went to some neighbors to let us have a fun of our own. 
The guys started to visit the wide veranda with the glassed lattice to inconspicuously drink some moonshine brought by someone.

In a small bedroom next to the dining room a cozy disco was arranged.
There was a record player with an LP disk of instrumental numbers by ‘The Singing Guitars' and the player's dimly lighted panel served the only illumination in the room except for the sliver of light that made its way from the corridor through the gap between the curtains pulled closely together in the doorway. 
From time to time, Lyuba’s brother, a blockhead seventh grader, thrust his hand from the corridor and clicked the switch on the wall behind a curtain.
The bulb under the bedroom ceiling flashed with the dazzling light. 
The dancers coiled back from each other, squinted their eyes and roared at the damn asshole who giggled and ran back to the veranda.
The guy partner in the pair closest to the curtains put the light out again...

I did not go to the veranda and lingered at the table fressing my favorite Olivier Salad.
When I turned to lemonade, already not so favorite but still tasty, there hardly remained anyone else at the table. 
Only a couple of chairs further there sat Tanya Krutas from the former parallel with a displeased face.
I plucked up my courage, came up to her and said, ‘Would you dance, please?’
She did not even look at me, but with even more disfavor pursed her lips, rose and moved to the disco bedroom with a pliant gait. 

There they did not swap the partners and the pairs did not part and, after waiting for the disk to shuffle through the gap between the numbers, wrapped their arms again around their partner pressing to each other with the tops of their bodies. 
The slight swaying of Tanya's thin waist in between my hands' palms laid upon her hips made me drunk more than wine. 
The pulsating rumble in my ears did not abate the utmost alertness of my every muscle – not to miss but respond to the least movement of her hands put on my shoulders.

And I was not angry with the moron clicking the switch, but, recoiling under the bright bulb, I peered at her profile with pale clean skin and sternly lowered eyes and admired the bob of her hair stringed below the back of her head.
Her breasts were sooner circles than hemispheres but even what was there plunged me into the ecstatic trance of Corybants.

(...although, at that time I did not know such terms and here Father would say again:
‘Piled up a mess of arty-farty words like a dog its fleas. You, top hopper!’…)

Yes. I was on top of bliss, I was in love irrevocably and forever…
