
Already after the midnight Olga and I retired to the marital bedchamber in our lean-to.
Only before the first wedding night, I had to scrape with a shovel Quak’s vomit out of the door and sweep away the cigarette butts that Olga’s girlfriends had left after secretive smocking.
I’d hang a padlock on the door if I had known beforehand.

The tape in the tape-recorder had been obviously played, wound and rewound from the place with the French erotic song which I prepared to play for the event. 
Hopeless to find it, I just switched the tape on from the very beginning—the song eventually would be played anyway—but when we finished it turned out that the tape reel was over too.
I did not hear when Briggite Bardot was moaning there.

Then on the tin roof of the lean-to a shower clattered and pore down on the long leaves of the corn in the garden outside the glazed frame and we just lay clasped in a tight embrace and it was good. 

The honeymoon coincided with my vacation at the Plant.
the first squabble happened on the third day of our married life.
I was sitting in the yard deciphering a sheet-music of some Spanish guitar etude.
 She walked past from the hutta to the lean-to and called me along.
I still picked strings for a minute or two, no more, before coming.
She was on the bed shedding tears because I did not need her and pay no attention.
Was that the right way to treat wives?
So I had to iron out my fault in the most effective way I know.
Irregardless of I did not actually get it what I was guilty of.

(...and by now I had figured out that so worked the female instinct for self-preservation:
‘If you have already got me then who do you keep training on that fucking guitar for?’
However, quite possible that even now I don’t understand them right…)

Lekha Kuzko came with a blissful news – we were to play dances at the Palace of Culture of the KEMZ Plant, he had arranged it.
I was delighted, there's no life without playing dances.
And besides, when Olga and I were coming to dances at the Loony and they kicked up a fight on the Dance Floor I feared the danger for her belly, although it was not noticeable yet.

The dances at KEMZ were attended by a crowd from areas too far away from the Loony.
Although the Spitzes played better music than us but waiting for a tram after their dances took really too long.
And even some guys from the Settlement started to come to the KEMZ Palace of Culture.
People like to join familiar crowds...

Vladya and Chuba were drafted into the army.
Sur, a neighbor of Chuba’s, who was still a tenth grader, stepped into his shoes of a bass guitarist.
A guy from the Zagrebellye, handled Fofik, started to sing with us.
His crowning number was the song by Makarevitch.

‘I drink to those who’re at the sea now...’

And another one about an American pilot shot down in the sky over Vietnam. 

‘My F-4 as fast as a bullet...’

(...only recently I found out that was a Russian adaptation of the ‘Secret Service Man’ of Mel Tormé which he sang in the 50’s.
In music they always were ahead of us…)

One night Olga got with the kisses to my dick and I shouted:
‘I don’t need a waflister wife!’
She recoiled and I immediately regretted my idiocy.
Moron! Why? It was so good!
Just joined the crowd of the dirty stupid ‘seminarists’.

When it became too cold in the lean-to, we moved into the hutta on the couch in the kitchen.
At the night I tightly closed the double-leaf door between the kitchen and the room where slept my parents and my brother and sister.
Not because of we having sex every night but so that they did not guess on what night we were at it...

At the dances in KEMZ Olga rarely danced, the belly became too big and the rockin' rollers around jumped without looking where to.
And her light brown mini coat could not be fastened lower than by the two upper buttons.

One night she began to cry that I absolutely fell out of love with her.
But that was not true, I felt sorry for her and wanted to protect from everything.
She cried until she made me make love to her.
And it was good, only I tried to be very careful so as not to hurt the belly in any way.

Four days later Olga gave birth to my first daughter, Lenochka.

Children are the flowers of life until they wake up… 

‘All the day you cried and cried
With your mouth open wide,
No more crying by my side
Or I'll throw you outside!' 

Olga’s small breasts turned out to be full of milk.
After the feeding there even was a need to milk off the excess.
Well, of course, she made sure that I tried it too.
Tastes differ, no one argues, but what do these babies find in it?
Pasteurized milk is much better...

Aunt Nina said that the child must be baptized. 
We took Lenochka to a hutta nearby School 12 at the address given by Olga's aunt.
There were many people in the yard.
On the whole, it was a church but only without the cross above, sort of an underground one. 
But inside it was a usual hutta only with not a single piece of furniture.
The baby was taken out of the envelope, hastily moistened so it roared and presented with a small cross on a string. 

I forgot even to think about the holy event but end January Lyonya, the Manager of the Experimental Section and also the Komsomol Head of the Repair Shop Floor, called all the younger locksmiths to the Management Office after work for a Komsomol meeting. 
There he told that he was told by the City Komsomol Committee that I was in church and christened my child for which deed the meeting should pronounce a reprimand to me as a renegade Komsomol member. 
Everyone voted ‘pro’ at once to cut the meeting short and go home but expressed the condolence that I was not expelled completely and they would still deduct Komsomol contributions from my salary for another ten years.
Later I learned that the baptizer priest each month had to hand in the list of visitors to his crossless hutta.
That’s some underground clergyman for you...

And in February I ran into a more severe punishment.
Lekha Kuzko was going to the city of Korosten to bring electric guitars for the KEMZ Palace of Culture and I wanted to go with him.
That morning I came to the Shop Floor Management Office asking to let me go but they told me to wait for the Head of the Shop Floor.
When Lebedev’s black overcoat showed up in the Mechanical Shop Floor aisle I went out to meet him.
Apparently, he hadn’t had his back straitened yet to the proper condition or maybe kept it too upright the day before but all he could pronounce was ‘no’.
Then I saw red and left because I hadn’t changed yet into my spetzovka.
As it turned out, Lekha had been already gone to Korosten.
To make the long story short, I got ‘absence from work’ for that day and the Repair Shop Floor Head issued the order to transfer me to a lower-paid position of a workman at the Smithy Shop Floor for three months.

‘You’d better fell the wood to make you coffins –
 The penal battalions are going to attack...' 

In the Smithy Shop Floor, instead of the unrelenting hum of machine-tools rambled the thunder of hydraulic hammers that sent a tremor through the asphalt floor, mixed with the roar of violent flames bursting from nozzles in the vents of furnaces where black iron ingots were heated to the scarlet whiteness. 
The howling of hefty fans in their round grated boxes was also in the score.
Such a fan had a meter wide sweep of their blades and if it caught someone's hand then… 
That was the reason for those muzzle-gratings.

In a word, you couldn’t find a better place for improving your vocal skills.
You might shout at top of your lungs and no one would hear you.
Even I couldn’t hear myself but still kept yelling:

‘Oh, Mommy,
Oh, Mommy-Mommy blues, 
Oh, Mommy blues...’

But my yelling exercises went on only while my partner Borya learned how much we were to load that day.

Borya, like me, was a penal workman because of violation of labor discipline, but he was native there, a smith of the Smithy Floor.
He was over thirty years old, blonde and not very tall, you’d hardly guess he was a smith.
His violation had been a state of intoxication at the working place.

Our job was loading of ingots in the furnace.
The ingots were in the left wing of the Smithy Shop Floor.
They were sizable pieces of axes from the railway cars or locomotives wheel pairs cut up by the gas cutters in the first shift.
The ingots, sure enough, non-hoistable by humans so in the wing there was a crane beam with the telpher. 

I grabbed hold of them with the grip hanging from the telpher hook and Borya operated the buttons of the hand console hanging from the telpher itself and forwarded the ingots to the trolley.
There I guided them and held in place until the lowered grip opened up.
That way we loaded several layers of the ingots, depending on the length of the cut pieces (the longer, the heavier) because it was us to push the trolley along the narrow gauge track of rails.

We pushed it into the main building and there onto the turnable disc.
It looked like a sewer hatch but only was swerving in its place.
We turned it with our loaded trolley 90 degrees to the left and slowly rolled it further to the furnace. 
The most demanding point in the transportation process was moving of a still standing trolley ahead.
That’s where you had to pull your sinews in earnest and when the trolley started to slowly roll then it was ours!

Under each furnace vent, there was a wide iron shelf. 
Turning his face away from the fiery heat pouring out the vent, Borya set a half-meter-wide tube-roller on the shelf. 
We put onto the roller the oblong spade with raised edges so that the ingots wouldn't roll off from it. 
That spade had the enormous handle of five meters long and was made of steel—not iron—with the section of six by four centimeters. 
The handle ended with a crossbeam for two workmen to grab its halves from each side of the handle. 
But at first, I held the end alone so that Borya could use the nearby stationary telpher to hoist an ingot from the trolley into the spade shielding his face from the fire in the furnace with his shoulder. 
Then he turned the telpher back to the trolley came up to me and each of us grabbed his half of the crossbeam.
‘Hup!’
And we, rubbing shoulders, went three-four wide strides, accelerating to jogging, towards the flaming hell in the furnace.
The run was ended with the synchronous jump up and sharp pushing the crossbeam down with the aggregated weight of our bodies so that the springy handle would transmit the impact to the spade to toss the ingot up and out. 
With landing on the floor, your face would turn away from the scorching heat of fire raging in the furnace.
That’s why Borya worked in the smith’s protective canvas apron and I was burning to the end my once-beloved red sweater.
With our necks defensively pulled in we strode back pulling the shovel after us and Borya went to hoist the next ingot on it.

‘Hither-thither...To and fro… 
Oh!. How good it feels!..' 

Then we drove the emptied trolley back to fetch a new batch of ingots.
Inside the furnace they also had to be stacked in layers and rows starting from the deepest, otherwise, they just wouldn't fit in. 
The more of them loaded inside the shorter the runs with the shovel...

I had not immediately mastered the synchronous jumping and Borya cursed me with inaudible, behind the rumble and roar, taboo words.
Failing to land an ingot in its proper place in the layer would fucking fuck your ass when loading the following ones. 

Borya was overly terse.
I had more communication with the fan (in a duo) than with him. 
But once Borya shouted into my ear, 
‘We’ve done forty tons today!’
The flaming furnace reflected in his pleased smile.
A labor victory!
Empty weigh-less bullshit. 
It’s just because we did it.

‘You load sixteen tons and what do you get?
Another day older and deeper in debt...’

We worked two shifts – the second and the third, leaving the first one to the gas cutters for cutting axes to pieces.
On the payday I could hardly believe my eyes – I had earned a hundred and twenty rubles a month!
‘...to a lower-paid position...’

‘Ha-ha, Mr. Lebedev!
Ha-ha! Mr. Heath! 
‘Cause I’m a workman!
Yea! Yea! Yea!..’

And to the smiths, the cashier was forking out two-three unopened packs of money in bank wrapping plus stray notes. 
Over three hundred rubles!
Yes, Borya, you’d better refrain from drinking at your working place.

‘Hither-thither...To and fro… 
Oh!... How good it feels!..' 


(...I have always been, am, and will be cursing that night when I let out that cry of the dirty stupid ‘seminarist’.
Yet, what’s said can’t be unsaid…)

And Olga again wanted something else…

Once, when I was throwing the ingots into her furnace, she began to demand,
‘Tell it… what!.. you’re doing… now...’
‘I’m… making!.. love… to you!..’
‘No!.. tell it… the other!.. way...’
‘Which… way?..’
‘You.. know!.. which...’
And I started to moan it out’
‘I'm… fuc… king… you!..' 
‘Ah!’
‘You'm… fu... cki... ng… I...' 
‘Oh, my!..’
The dark kitchen.
The baby's asleep. 
And what could it understand then…

Some other time from the darkness,
‘Hit me!’
‘You crazy?’
‘No, I’m not! Hit me!’
She made me at last slap lightly on her cheek.
‘Not this way! Hit hard!’
I knew she’d have her way anyway and gave a more sonorous slap.
She lay on her back sobbing.
‘What up? Did it hurt?’
No answer, only quiet sobs.
I had to comfort her the most reliable, of all I know, way.
And it was good…

Then I was lying on my back thinking.
Why would she?
A slap in the face as the punishment for a misconduct?. 
I did not know anything about any…
Before me?
Without me?
Instead of?. 

(...certain thought are better not be started at all and if unwittingly started it’s better not to think them on all the way to the ultimate end…)

End May the term of my penal exile to the Smithy Shop Floor ran out and the same day I received a summons to present myself on May 27 for the draft into the army.

And again there was a feast in our hutta’s yard because in the Settlement seeing-off to the army was almost the same thing as a wedding.

They all drank and sang only without the Orpheuses’ accompaniment and Mother was carrying around the table Lenochka in her arms wrapped in a sheet over the baby’s loose jacket.
She grabbed her Grandma’s gown collar with her tiny fingers and looked around with her pink lips open in surprise...

The next morning they saw me to the two-story House of the Deaf by the bridge in the railway embankment crossing the Peace Avenue.
There were lots of draftees in the caps on their skin-headed heads and a crowd of seers-off.
Tolik Arkhipenko kept assuring everyone that I would be fine.
Olga was crying loudly.

The draftees were driven into two big buses which started to move but, after turning into the Peace Avenue, stopped  – someone was missing. 
We went out to the roadside.
The seers-off crowd rushed across the Avenue.

Olga ran up the first.
She kissed me with her soft wet lips and pressed to my chest her small soft breasts without a bra under the light summer blouse wet with her tears. 

The belated draftee was brought in a car and we were told to get on buses again.
The motor started.
The door slammed shut and the bus finally, uncompromisingly and irretrievably carried us away to where the army would make of me a real man and defender of the Homeland.
 





