
I waited for her going from school to see her to the gate of our hutta because most of the School 13 students dispersed over the Settlement through the Nezhin Street.

I even went to School 5 to support our girls when they lost in the Volleyball Championship for the city schools.
She also was on the team. 
Their loss almost did not disappoint me, I was too busy falling deeper and deeper in love with her high cheekbones.
And I forgave her her little-crooked legs. 
After all, that's a characteristic feature of the Amazons, fearless and beautiful warrioress riders. 
But how nice she looked in her sportswear white shirt!

I never managed to melt her unavoidable and inexplicable displeasure. 
As soon as I bobbed up near her, she beckoned to one of her girlfriends. 
She even changed her route of returning home from school and bypassed the Nezhin Street via the May Day Street. 
I had to wither off.
Cold snowstorms piled up the drifts upon the cold ashes of the love unaccepted...

And also with abundant snowfalls met the capital of our Motherland, the Hero-City of Moscow, the participants of the winter stage in the All-Union military-patriotic game ‘Zarnitsa’.
Six participants plus a supervisor went there from Konotop with their skis.

I was sure of my skis, the rubber bands fixed by Father stayed alright.
I threw them onto the third level bunk, undressed and climbed into the bed on the second level in the compartment of a second-class car. 

The light in the car was already turned off but behind the window stretched the brightly lit Platform 4 covered with the crust of trodden snow.
Finally from the locomotive in the head of the train came the domino-ramble of cars pulling each other.
Our car also jerked and with smooth acceleration scudded forward.
To Moscow! To Moscow!.

On the evening of the next day, we left our skis in the vestibule of a huge school and the tenants of the surrounding neighborhood took us to their apartments. 
One Zarnitsa-participant for one hospitable family.
In the morning my hosts treated me with tea and their son led to the same school closed for the holidays.
He warned me to mark the way well so that in the evening I could find their apartment where I was billeted to stay. 

We ate three times a day in the huge canteen not far away from the huge school in the neighborhood of multi-storied apartment blocks.
Except for that day when we, together with our skis, went to the Taman Guard Division stationed near Moscow.
There we ran to the attack through the deep snow drifts between young fur trees and by our side ran a soldier, also on skis, in a greatcoat and burst ammunition rounds from his Kalashnikov assault rifle. 
That day we, together with two hundred other guys who had come to Zarnitsa in Moscow, were fed with the midday meal in a soldiers’ canteen of the Taman Division.

The following day after a long excursion around the city, our Konotop group arrived at the Red Square to visit the Lenin Mausoleum. 
We joined the dense line in the Red Square and were moving with it for a long time in the thickening dusk over the black cobbles of the snow-strewn pavement.
The icy chill from those stones pierced even through the thick soles of winter shoes and my feet got awfully cold.
With only fifty meters left to the Mausoleum entrance, we learned that their working day was over and it was locked for the night. 

Our supervisor took us to the GUM, aka State Universal Store, on the other side of the Red Square to get warm in half an hour.
I was afraid such short a stretch wouldn't be enough for getting so cold feet warmed up, but as it turned out half an hour could do the trick.
The supervisor announced that the Zarnitsa was over yet we had another day of staying in Moscow and the next morning we would definitely get to the Mausoleum and then go shopping.

But the next morning after leaving my hosts' apartment I tarried in the neighborhood's huge canteen and on coming to the huge school learned that our group had already left for the Mausoleum. 

The watchman was going home until five o’clock and locked me inside (the weather was frosty) so I spent all of that day in the huge empty school.
Almost all doors in the building were locked.
In the watchman's room, there was a phone. 
I’ve never used it before and started learning.
I wound the disc, dialing random digits until there were beeps in the receiver.
‘Hello?’
‘Hello! Is that zoo over there?’
‘No.’
‘Then why an ass answers the call?’

(...ugh, it's disgusting to even recall…) 

Soon after the watchman unlocked me, our group arrived and I was told we were going home next morning.

In the apartment of my hosts, I saw ‘Twenty Years Later' by Dumas in their bookcase and asked where they sold such books. 
The hosts started to explain how many crossings there were to reach the bookshop.
Only it should be closed already.
But I went out all the same...

It was dark and very quiet and rare snowflakes were coming down from above, one by one.
I stood by the glass walls of the locked bookshop with a feeble glow of distant light inside.
All around was a vast emptiness was an immense hollow silence...

Then a belated passer-by walked along the pavement leaving shallow footprints in the soft snow and I went back to the strangers' apartment.
There was ‘The Vertical’, a movie with Vladimir Vysotsky, on TV...

We knew exactly what we wanted: to become a vocal-instrumental ensemble because in the then USSR there were no rock groups
Rock groups were an attribute of the rotten capitalist West and in our state free from the exploitation of a man by man rock groups were called vocal-instrumental ensembles, aka VIAs. 

The songs about the prosecutor who raised his blood-smeared hand against the happiness and peaceful life of an honest pickpocket were just the starting point of our glorious way towards recognition. 
Those upstart crows, the VIAs of ‘The Singing Guitars’ and ‘The Jolly Guys’, in fact, stole our songs.
It was us who should perform the hit about bringing the ring of Saturn to ask the one we loved to marry us, and no one but we should turn out that thrilling electric guitar vibrato in ‘The Gypsy Girl’ in the LP Disc of instrumental numbers.
It's just that while we were training ourselves with the fact that he did not sell pigeons at the Bazaar but hunted the passers-by pockets, they jumped out before us. 
But we did not give up.

At the breaks in the two-story building of the ‘Cherevko’s school’, where the ninth grade was again transferred to, we gathered at the window on the staircase landing for making music.
The music making instrument was a metal drawing triangle thrown on the windowsill by Sasha Rodionenko, aka Radya, to knock out a rhythmic backup to the singing. 

Chuba at once crossed out any chance for me to be a singer. 
The problem was not in my vocal chords but in my ears.
I just did not hear my own sharps from flats when singing.
There was no way to argue with Chuba who finished the Music School in the class of button-accordion and, as an expert, should hear better.
Concerning Vladya's musical ear, Chuba admitted that it was in place and that Vladya even had some voice, only it was not clear as to where that voice sat in him.
So there remained only two vocalists: Chuba and Radya.

It’s very likely that we would not progress any further from that windowsill had a new teacher of Music, Valentina, not come to our school after the winter holidays.
She looked like a girl but styled her hair in ladies' way of making a round pillow of hair on top of their heads.
And she vigorously spread wide her accordion billows out and squeezed them back and with the bell collected her instrument and hurried to the tram because, besides the lessons by us, she also taught Music at School 12. 

She said we might go to the Regional Review of Young Talents, but we should work hard because the Review was in February that started next week.
The girls from School 12 would sing there and we had to rehearse accompaniment to their songs.
That way we’d pass for a VIA from the Plant Club because the Regional Review was not for school students.

Anything can be solved exceedingly simple if you know how to do it. 

Our rehearsals were held in the evenings behind the blue blinds on the windows in the Physics classroom.
The string group was enhanced with one more guitarist from School 12.
He looked more mature than a tenth grader and did not conceal his special relation with Valentina wrapping her neck with a scarf after the rehearsals in an owner's manner and she trustingly leaned her head on his shoulder, walking along the dark corridor of the school to the exit. 

The girls from School 12 appeared at the rehearsals just a couple of times and not in full, but Valentina assured us that they knew their part.
On the final stage preview in the Club, the day before going to Sumy, there popped up one more pretty fat guy with no school affiliation who sang: 
    ‘Hello there, the field of Russia,
     I’m just a thin spike of yours...’
The eight vocal-girls from School 12 did a patriotic number emphasizing the fact that the Komsomol members, firstly, think of their Motherland and not of themselves. 
And Sasha Rodionenko, aka Radya, was giving out a song by Vysotsky about the mass graves.

Supposedly, we cut a nice picture – the line of eight white-shirted girls in front of two microphones, Valentina with her shining accordion, Scully standing behind a single drum on its rack, three guitarists with acoustic guitars hanged on package strings over their shoulders and Volodya Liman by a double bass. 

Where did Liman come from and why without any nickname?
He was a tenth grader from our school and lived at the end of the Smithy Street in the hutta next to a century-old birch tree. 
In spring they milked it gathering about a dozen of three-liter glass jars of the birch sap.
But the sap, of course, was not all for Liman alone because it was a long brick hutta-block of four apartments. 
The absence of a nickname was easily explained by the fact that his last name by itself sounded like a criminal handle – ‘Liman’.
The double bass was given to him by Aksyonov, the Head of the Variety Ensemble.

The Head couldn't say 'no' to the drummer of his Variety Ensemble.
Hardly that Liman had much knowledge or any skills at playing the double bass.
Most credible, he, like me, just wanted really to get access to the music industry. 
He joined us without a single rehearsal at the stage Preview in the Club.
Valentina asked him to play it low and not too often.
However, Liman could not keep his zeal in check and by the end of the stage preview two fingers on his right hand were bleeding with the skin rubbed off against the hard thick strings.
To somehow pull them at the Regional Review in Sumy, he wrapped his fingers with an insulating tape. 

Eleonora Nikolayevna, the nominal Head of the Children Sector went too as the official head of our Youth Ensemble in one of her blouses of starched immaculateness and a cameo brooch under the collar.
The long earring, no doubt, hung in place.

We went to Sumy by the morning diesel train.
While waiting for it, I was strangely struck by the sight of our three guitars leaning onto each other like a stack of rifles on a snow-clad platform.
Some piercing nudity.

The Regional Palace of Culture buzzed like a beehive, crowded with young talents who had come to show themselves in the Review.
We were auditioned in a separate room and ticked as participants in the gala concert at five o’clock.

In other rooms, too, auditions and rehearsals were in a full swing.
In one of them, I for the first time in my life heard and was mesmerized by the mewing sounds of a live electric guitar. 
Wow! Wow!
It filled the whole room with its swaying vibrato.

We went out for a midday meal and in the canteen, I fell under the spell of Sveta Vasilenko from the group of Chorus girls of School 12. 
On the way back I walked by her vacant side as a dog on the lead; on her other side walked her lanky girlfriend holding her arm.
The hailstorm of giggling and sneering, addressed to no one in particular, issued by my friends following closely behind, did not sober me. 

During the final rehearsal, she won me over to the hilt. 
Standing in the line of other chorus-girls she cast at me the glances of her black glinting eyes to drop them modestly down the very next moment, or direct their look at the ceiling.
I had read in more than one book that beauties know how to shoot with their glances, but I could never imagine that their eye-shooting fell you on the spot. 

After the rehearsal was over and with about two hours of waiting for the gala concert I approached her and suggested going to the cinema.
She was not sure and started to hesitate despite her girlfriend had backed up my idea. 
She turned out not so lanky, after all, and quite a nice individual coaxing Sveta to go with me, so why not?
Our united efforts could not overcome Sveta's uncertainty yet I still managed to get from her the final ‘no' and left with my heart shot through. 

I was on verge of dying to the very movie theater and until I plunged into the magical world of the seventeenth century France with Gerard Filip and Gina Lollobrigida in the ‘Fanfan the Tulip'. 
They reanimated me.

How did we perform at the gala concert?
With my non-hearing musical ear, I'm not the right guy to make conclusions. 
When three guitars keep strumming in unison the same chords, there’s not a big chance to guess whose one is somewhat out of tune.
The insulating tape notably softened down the dubbing of the double bass.
Scally used the jazz drumming brushes.
Valentina’s accordion rolling over her energetic body was covering both er-harmonic inaccuracies and getting out of key.
I believe that on the whole all that sounded fresh, fervent, young, talented and (most important!) patriotic.

After the concert, a bus form KaPeVeRrZe Plant was waiting for us by the Regional Palace of Culture. 
It was not for nothing that Eleonora Nikolayevna was taken with us to Sumy.
On the bus trip home everyone was meaningfully looking at me and Sveta, though we did not sit next to each other.
The chorus girls kept singing all kinds of songs about the eyes that drive us mad and ‘Sveta’s shining, Sveta’s lighting...’ substituting her name for ‘Moon’ in that song.
Sveta was snapping at them but I felt no embarrassment at all; I just did not care.

The next day at school Volodya Gourevitch kept repeating that I was lured to our rivals at the CJI and laughed his protracted laughter. 
Tolik Sudak from our class for no reason at all started to share in a group of guys that Sveta Vasilenko was the daughter of the Head of Militia Station and that she once came to her school in a jizz stained skirt.

When they allow themselves such offensive allusions about your beloved you have to demand satisfaction at a duel. 
However, at PE classes Tolik stood the first in the line.
He was a strong guy from Podlipnoye and always knew everything, probably, because of his mother taught Maths at our school.
That’s why I just stood by as if all that had nothing to do with me and silently hated the blond curls and drowsy look of Tolik Sudak’s pale-blue eyes.

Soon after, the Youth Ensemble participated in a Club concert but when it was over I did not try to see Sveta home.
What killed my love?
The monotonous joke and loud laughter of Volodya Gourevitch?
Or, maybe, Tolik Sudak’s report about the stained skirt?
No, the heaviest blow was dealt by the fact of her residence in the Depot Street.
That was another unfavorable neighborhood for those in love.

Vadik Glushchenko once escorted a girl to her hutta in the Depot Street and was stopped by a gang of ten.
They knocked him down and kicked from all the sides.
‘The main thing is to cover your head with your arms, then you got woozy and the kicks grew dull,’ he later shared his experience.

The end of winter was postponed with so abundant snowfall that the Nezhin Street had to be cleared with a bulldozer pushing mounds of snow.
Coming from school I preferred leaping from one to another pile of hardened snow moved to the fences to walking along the cleared road.
The fun ended when I suddenly felt a sharp pain in my groin.
The remaining way to the hutta I followed the prints of the bulldozer tracks. 

In the evening Mother, worried with my moans, demanded to show what I had there.
I refused.
Then Father said:
‘Well, show to me, I’m also a man.’
The scrotum swelled up to the size of a teacup and felt hard to the touch.
 Father frowned and when Mother asked from the kitchen:
‘So, what’s there?’
He said I had to see a doctor.
It was an eerie evening – the agony of panic and despair.

In the morning, slowly walking with shortened paces, I came with Mother to the Railway Polyclinic next to the Station.
In the reception, they gave me a slip of paper with my number in the queue to the doctor. 
We sat down to wait on the chairs in the hollow echoing corridor by the door to the medic’s office.
When it was my turn to enter the white door, I, avoiding to look at Mother, told her that if needed I agree to be operated on let only everything be normal.
The doctor turned out to be a woman but either her white robe gave her the status of man or my fear of losing something, not exactly known to me, drowned out my shyness.
The doctor said it was a sprain and I needed spirits compresses.
Two days later the scrotum returned to its usual shape and I forgot my agonizing fears.

On the seventh of March Vladya brought to school a miniature bottle of cognac.
We shared it between three of us drinking from its tiny neck.
My mouth got filled with glowing and we laughed louder and oftener than usual but there was nothing like the bliss from the wine at Vladya's birthday. 

We were dismissed early because it was the eve of the holiday and when I got home the influence completely disappeared except for the heaviness in my head.

I climbed onto the hutta’s roof because Father had been telling me for several days already that it was necessary to dump snow from there.
Four short brick chimneys protruding from the snow helped to determine our part of the roof.
The roof was rather steep and in the final stretch my felt boots slipped and I fell into the narrow back garden.
The landing was successful – on both legs and into a deep snowdrift, however, when I saw the pointed planks in the low fence between the back garden and the yard of the Turkovs a couple of inches aside, I became cold with horror.

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my adversities and falls sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you lying in a tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lap of the river named Varanda…)

End March a team of doctors came to our class for physical examination of the guys and to register us as future conscripts.
The girls were taken to another room for some special lecture and the doctors told us to undress and turn around and sit on a chair for them to knock a rubber hammer beneath our knees, after height-measuring and dick inspection. 
Filling my future-conscript card, they put "N" in the line of ‘sexual development’.
Tolik Sudak explained that "N" stood for ‘normal’ and all guys got that mark except for Sasha Shwedov and the girls, who returned after we got dressed, somehow found it out and that’s why they were whispering and giggling...

The summer began with the examination session for the ninth grade.
Chemistry was the most feared of the examinations  – who could really bottom those benzyl rings and their atomicity? 
Like many others, I memorized the answers to one of twenty-four question sets, aka ‘tickets', from the Tickets List. 
At the exam, the ticket numbers written on slips of paper were strewn face down on the desk of examiners for us to choose. 
My chances were one to twenty-four and I lost. 
However, the teacher of Chemistry, Tatyana Fyodorovna, for unknown reason started to pull me out and, eventually, evaluated my ignorance with ‘four'. 

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my etc., etc…)

Physicist Binkin was the assistant examiner by her side and had fun showing Vladya the ticket numbers from the desk in front of the examiners. 
He would raise a number up in the air, show it to Vladya, bob his head once or twice and put the number back to the same place face down again.
As fair a play as one could wish.

Unfortunately, Vladya was occupying the desk at the end of the classroom in order to copy from the cribs prepared by diligent girls who had already passed the exam and handed him their cheat sheets.
But what might you have understood from a multiple-folded narrow paper-strip with incomprehensible formulas and the handwriting three times smaller than normal? 
Of course, Vladya would be happy to ask for the change of the ticket and swap it for the one he had learned by rote. 
Yet Binkin’s fair play was of no help: he saw the place the slips were taken from and put back, but he couldn’t make the numbers out however hard he squinted.

He used two more allowed ticket changes, raising his chances to three to twenty-four, but missed again. 

Nonetheless, he got ‘three’ and a comment from Binkin:
‘That’s solely for your unalloyed proletarian origin...’

I never quibbled about my clothes, I wore what would be given and Mother looked after them not to be dirty or torn.
So my new thing—a jacket made of leatherette to the patterns from ‘The Working Woman' magazine—appeared on Mother's initiative and it was her to sew it. 
The money to buy leatherette was found because Father moved to work at RepBase at a locksmith job and his salary grew by ten rubles. 

It turned out a good jacket of a nice brown color with cuffs and belt of darker cloth.
If you looked from afar it even glinted in the sun. 
Two weeks later the leatherette at the elbow folds got fretted to its base but my award I received when the jacket still had good looks.
Yes, the Trade Union Committee of the KaPeVeRrZe Plant rewarded me for outstanding participation in amateur activities.

At the All-Plant trade union conference in the Club, the Chairman of the Plant Trade Union Committee personally handed me not a useless Certificate of Honor but a heavy paper packet.
It contained dark rubber fins, a mask, and a snorkel.

I even took the equipment to the Seim once, but swimming in the fins turned out much harder than you might think watching ‘The Amphibian Man’.
And water somehow penetrated into the mask and was getting to my nose.
Although, perhaps, it couldn’t be otherwise.

However, that summer I didn’t plan to study the bottom life of large water bodies.
Finding a job was then my main concern.
I needed money and a sizable sum of it.
Because I was ‘horseless’.

Vladya had a motor scooter ‘Riga-4’, Chuba drove ‘Desna-3’.
 Scally reconstructed his bike into moped and when a flock of the Settlement scooterists buzzing with their motors scudded along the Peace Avenue he did not fell too far behind.
Yet, ‘Riga-4’ was the coolest.

Vladya, of course, allowed me to drive it a couple of times — the buzz of the engine, wind in the face, speed operating, delight! 
But there was no use of begging scooter for a ride from Chuba.
Saddled in its seat with his feet on the ground he only chuckled in the answer. 
‘Let me, eh? Don’t be greedy.’
‘I ain’t greedy, I am gritty!’
‘A miser can’t be gritty. I’ll ride only to the Professions Street and no further, eh?’
He laughed but did not let.
‘A meanie asshole!’
But he only chuckled.
Scully’s moped I did not want myself.

 But where to get money to buy a scooter?
That was the question.
Mother said that a guy after the ninth grade might get a job at the Vegetable Storage Base, he only needed to visit the Head Office of the Workers Supplying Department, aka ORS, near the Under-Overpass and write an application at their Personnel Department.

Vegetable Base was a great idea!
There should be truckloads of strawberries and the watermelons sold at stores also should also be reaching them through the Vegetable Base.
But would they give me a job?
I wasn’t sixteen yet.
In the half-dark corridor with the ORS offices, I was more nervous than through all the summer exams at school. 
I got it!
So began my labor career...

The Vegetable Base was located at the end of the Depot Street. 
I rode there by my bike.
Besides me, there were ten more school guys. 
Mostly from School 14.
I recognized one of them: a short guy sporting long hair, handled Luke.
It was he who once slapped me in the face for shooting in his back.
He silently let the bygones be bygones, well, and I even more so.

The starting couple of days we were sorting boxes, empty, of course, without any strawberries.
The whole ones we stacked in the shed, those in need of repair piled next to the shed and the shattered remnants were dragged to the stoves under the open sky in the middle of the Base yard...

On arriving at the Base a truck with a load of vegetables drives onto a weighbridge to be weighed.
After dumping the load they weigh it once more; the difference between the loaded and empty truck shows how much vegetables was brought.
Provided that the weighbridge works correctly.
