
That’s where the calibration is needed, as well as a specialist who knows how to tune the weighbridge.
For the calibration process, you need a trial one-ton load of 20 kg pig iron weighs and you also need some workforce to move that ton from one corner of the weighbridge to another, to another, to another, to the middle... 

The job of calibration helpers showed who among us was who.
At first, it was like a sporting event we carried the weighs racing each other, by the third corner we started to notice which of us shirked and who was going to the end… 

Then for two or three days, we cleaned the potato storage block of its rotted stock.
I never imagined there could be so intolerable stench in the world.
We dragged that horrid muck out in two-handled wicker baskets to dump in the thicket of tall grass at the Vegetable Base outskirts.
The number of working school guys diminished to five. 

The main workforce of the Base were women in black robes and colored kerchiefs on their hair.
They sorted the carrots or beetroots in other blocks and we moved and stocked the filled boxes.
Sitting in a circle around a dusty knoll of vegetables they never stopped yakking, not for a minute.
They were telling each other endless sagas of ‘he’ and ‘she’.
How that ‘she' of theirs grew fat, then skinny, then got to the hospital, then told her mother she couldn't live without him, then died, then cheated him and fled with someone else... 
And ‘he’ was tall, then short, then pot-bellied, then bald, then black-haired, then a drunk; ‘he’ asked to marry him and did not pay alimony, 'he' was treated for alcoholism and ripped off the linoleum from the kitchen floor to take it to his lover widowed two times...
And so they would pour along the score of their chin music yarn until the blonde guy from School 14, Long by his handle, addressed the peppiest one in the circle of squaws seated on upset empty boxes:
‘So, d’you give or what?’
‘At once!’ was the reply. ‘And I’ll pull at it so that tear it off you!’
And her squaw-friends would begin to silence her with oops and pffts and ‘watch your mouth! It’s a kid you talkest to!’

For the midday meal I went home by bike – twenty minutes there, twenty minutes back, ten minutes for soup and tea or, maybe, compote.
So, four times a day I gained the first space velocity pedaling all the way down the concrete dive into the Under-Overpass tunnel.
Who, from Vegetable Base workers, does not crave for crazy speed? 
Whee-hoo!

In the morning the Head of the Vegetable Base allocated jobs for the workforce.
A couple of times I got a coopers’ helper job.

The area in front of their stocky workshop was crowded with barrels in need of repair.
I rolled or dragged them into: depending on their condition. 
Two mujiks in caps and aprons knocked the iron hoops off and the barrel disintegrated into a heap of slightly bent planks which they called ‘klepkas’.

The coopers sorted klepkas, threw the hopeless off filling up for the shortage from the stock of odd klepkas.
They planed and fitted them to each other, collected the bottoms from straight planks, inserted the bottoms on both ends and drove the hoops back.
Of course, I knew that by saying ‘he’s missing a klepka in the head’ people meant the same as when they said ‘not all at home’ or just ‘crazy’ but it was in that workshop that I got it where that meaning came from – you cannot fill a barrel with a missing klepka it’s as impossible as filling a cup with crazed walls.

I carried the waste to the brick stoves in the yard with the iron cauldrons embedded in them.
The coopers worked unhurriedly fixing two or three barrels a day and the time by their side passed so very slowly but in their workshop, there was a pleasant smell of wood shavings. 

By the masons, it smelled of damp earth. 
They worked in a long basement bunker replacing the log wall with a wide masonry. 
They also wore caps and aprons. 
The caps were the same as on the coopers but the aprons sturdier. 
I was very much eager to try my hand at laying a wall, at least a little.
The older mason allowed me to lay one row.
He stood aside and smiled at something, although his partner grumbled that I was doing it not the way it should be.

My helper partner from School 14 also grumbled all the time, however, not on the point of masonry.
His standing subject of dissatisfaction was the Head of the Base.
Being unhappy to have such a boss, he shirked the work the Head was allocating for two of us. 
I did not mind doing more than my partner only it seemed not right and I was glad when he decided to quit.

And then the cucumber season began.
They were coming in by cars pushed with a diesel locomotive along the tracks entering the Base grounds.
The cars were filled with boxes of cucumbers that had to be moved to the stoves in the yard in whose cauldrons the brine with smelly dill was boiling and crowds of barrels stood around, with their lids removed, prepared to get their load of cucumbers for pickling. 
The already familiar squaw-team worked there but they did not have time anymore for chin-wagging about ‘she' and ‘he'. 
They cooked the pickling ‘oozuar’ in the stove-embedded cauldrons with iron lids and poured it into the barrels loaded with cucumbers.

I did not aspire to be an ‘oozuar'-cooker, I was satisfied with the job of stoker feeding the stoves with the wood waste of broken boxes and cracked klepkas some of which had to be shortened with an ax. 
In general, it was not a conveyor job – they would call and tell when to add the fuel and then again get seated someplace and wait for the next call.
And I sat in the sun which filled the shadeless yard, way off from the stoves by which it was even hotter.

To while the time, I practiced taking chords of a six-stringed guitar: from D-minor to A-minor, to E-major, on a smooth piece of plank grabbed from the pile of fuel 
The women laughed from about the cauldrons:
‘Found your missing klepka at last?’
But I did not pay attention to them taking B-7th and thinking about Natalie...

When walking along the sidewalk you meet a girl with a kerchief around her neck which she had tied not like the pioneer necktie but with the knot on her shoulder, you got it at once that she knows what's what in the chic style.
And at once you feel an urge to come up, get acquainted, have a talk.
But how to speak up? What to say?
Who wants to get ‘piss off!’?
And then to feel yourself a smashed tomato.

And quite another matter knowing that the stylish girl's name was Natasha Grigorenko and you had even tried to learn ballroom waltzing with her as your partner under the button-accordion of Volodya Ilyich Gourevitch. 
‘Hello, Natasha! How are you?’
‘Oh, Seryozha! Is that you? Actually, at School 12 everyone calls me Natalie.' 

We happened to be walking the same direction and I saw her to the corner of the street she lived in.
That’s the Suvorov Street, opposite the middle driveway into the Bazaar.

(...or, might it was she to greet me first on that sidewalk? 
After all, for tying the kerchief that dashy way one needs not only knowing the fashion but a resolute nature as well...)

Whoever it was, but the next step was made by me.
Maybe not too soon.
In a week or so.
Or was it even a month?
Anyway, I made that decisive step.
Or rather a very resolute jump.

Radya and I were riding the back steps of the tram going to the Settlement, being fanned by the strong counter wind.
And when the tram rumbled along the Bazaar, I suddenly turned my head and glanced across the road into the Suvorov Street.
Not far from the corner, two girls were playing badminton.
Sure thing, I immediately recognized Natalie’s long straight hair.
‘Bye, Radya!’
And I jumped off without answering his:
‘Where to?’

Yes, no mistake: she it was.
And her partner also turned out to be my former classmate, Natasha Podragoon, who, together with Natalie went over to School 12 because of its Maths and Physics specialization.
Of course, I at once gushed some yackety-yack to the tune about giving free master classes to share the proper skills of training the shuttlecock.
And then—who could imagine!—another chance passer-by turned over the corner.
Radya obviously jumped off before the stop at our school, although he had been going to visit his Grandpa.

Natasha Podragoon soon went home because both Radya and I talked to her so too little, if at all, on account of her being fat.
Natalie invited us into her hutta yard where on a table dug into the ground lay a stack of Czech ‘Film a Divadlo' magazines. 
I got carried away with their pictures and Radya snapped up the conversational initiative.
But then from the neighbor garden, two missiles of dry earth lumps came, though missing under. 
Natalie yelled at the boy she would complain to his parents but for Radya that seemed not enough and he ran to the garden fence to whip the fool up with an elder guy's lecture. 
Or maybe, he wanted to show off his sporting bearing, after all, he had attended the volleyball section of the Youth Sports School for two years. 
Either Natalie somehow sympathized with the ten-year-old Othello of her neighbor or Radya, despite all his training crashed some of the potato bushes on his run but while he bullied the boy behind the fence Natalie told me to come on Thursday – she had more of those magazines. 
So we started dating.
Me and Natalie.

Perhaps, it would be more accurate to say that she was dating me because I did not know how to do it. 
I just came to 8, Suvorov Street on the appointed day, greeted her mother, sat on the couch and turned the pages of another ‘Film a Divadlo' magazine. 
Some folks know how to live!
Where could they manage to get such magazines from?

Then her father came home from work on his motorcycle with a sidecar.
He had the same round chin as Natalie and he gave her a permission to go out for a walk till ten but no later than half to eleven.
And we went out.

She talked a lot but then not just shooting the breeze like some others.
Natalie became my enlightener.
Despite the long years of reading addiction, there was so much I did not know. 
That the coolest candies were ‘Grilyazh' only they were not on sale in Konotop. 
You had to go after them to Moscow or Leningrad and even there it's not a snap to find them. 
And the most delicious sandwich was bread and butter with layers of sliced tomato and boiled egg.
And it, of course, should be rye bread.
And Louis Armstrong was the singer with the most hoarse voice in the world.

And following her lead, I borrowed a book of poems by Voznesensky in the Club library. 
I had seen it before on the shelves but bypassed because it was poetry.
So that’s what the real poetry meant!

But much more than for filling my educational gaps, I needed her for the moments when I swam in thrill.
For example, we were going to the Peace Movie Theater and she allowed to hold her arm-in-arm.
Gee! That’s impossible to convey!
I felt the delicate skin of her forearm because she was in a summer dress and I had grabbed her around the biceps.
Although girls have no biceps to talk of.

 I was on a full flight, I swam in thrill starting from under the bridge over the Peace Avenue, past the Zelenchuk area, and almost to the Peace Square. 
Then she explained that it would be more correct when the girl herself holds you by the arm and we continued to go on the way she shared.
Also nice, though before that…
And then I received a ball lightning strike when walking on, absorbed in the conversation, she half turned to me and—O!—her large, taut right breast pressed to my forearm… 
The bliss that stops your pulse…

So I had what to think about near the Vegetable Base stoves, practicing chords on the having been missed but eventually found klepka of mine.

It’s hard for those enlightened to abstain from sharing the light of truth they saw.
I attempted to bring the revelation over to my sister.
We were walking along the Forge Street towards the Club when she said:
‘Come one, I’ll take my brother under the pretzel!’ and she took my arm.
‘Listen, Kiddy,' said I because we, my brother with me, and our friends and all ours rarely called her by name but only ‘Kiddy', or ‘Red-Haired'. 
‘I can teach you a trick that any guy would be yours in no time.' 
‘O, really?’ my sister said to me. ‘Is that what you’re talking about?’
And she half turned to me on the move touching her breast to my forearm.

Such a hopeless naivety!
How could I imagine—even for a split second—there was something I would be able to learn before her?
I had to apologize and all the remaining way to the Club we laughed like mad at what a self-confident patsy I was.

But no happiness goes on forever…
In one of the evening goings out with Natalie some guy came up to us between the Under-Overpass and the Bazaar and we stopped for a talk.
Or rather they had a talk because of being from one school and I just stood there as an odd lamppost. 
He had a cool shirt on, I had not seen anything like that before – red and green stripes as wide as on pajamas. 
And I also had never had pajamas, but they were sometimes shown in movies.

He rhapsodized which of the Moscow universities he would enter because his uncle was a diplomat and knew everybody there.
And he, the uncle, invited him to go to the Black Sea after the entrance exams by his, uncle’s, ‘Volga’ so that the attractive nephew would serve a bait to lime the girls.
Then they bye-nowed each other and we parted but Natalie was obviously put out of humor.
By her hata's gate, she told me that she had already been dating a guy. 
One evening they were going on an empty bus and he looked back at the conductor in her seat by the door and said:
‘Conductor is not a human,’ and kissed Natalie.

And then I also felt down in the dumps because it was clear that they were kissing and with no conductors around.
I thought that it was, probably, that same red-green yakker but I didn’t ask questions.
That evening all the way from the Suvorov to the Nezhin Street I walked forever crushed by grief... 

It’s easy to determine the extent of a Konotoper's prosperity by finding out if they had a hut at the Seim river.

Upstream from the Bay Beach, some five hundred meters closer to the railway bridge, the long gully gashed a willow thicket.
At the end of it on the white sand between the pliant willows there stood about four or six dozen huts of the Partnership ‘Priseimovye’.
Well, calling them huts needed a certain stretch of liberality – just thrown together booths made of planks and covered with tin roofs.

They were small in size – for a couple or three iron beds on the floor of sand.
No window was needed.
On their arrival for the relaxation, the hut owner kept the door open all day long.
But if they were a fisherman, they would lock the door and go down to the gully where a row of long and narrow flat-bottomed boats stood afloat, chained and padlocked to the pales in the sandy bank. 
Putting the tackle on the bottom of their boat, they would unlock the weighty padlock, get seated in the narrow stern and paddle with a single oar to come out of the gully to the expanse of the Seim river and then proceed to their favorite place for fishing, the spot where they kept chumming fish with caked chaff. 

Having a hut was of great convenience – you could go swimming to the Bay Beach (directly two hundred meters across the willow thicket) and on coming back cook your meal on the Primus stove blazing its blue flame on the table dug into sand by your hut.
Many people went to their huts by the suburban train on Friday evening and returned by the last one on Sunday.
And owning no hut on the Seim you could go there only Saturdays and Sundays; in the morning – there and by 17:24 or 19:07 back to Konotop. 

When Kuba arrived in the summer after his first year at the Nautical School we, sure thing, decided to spurt to the Seim.
Only we had to wait for the weekend because I had a job at the Vegetable Base and besides on weekends, the ORS booth trucks came to the Bay Beach to sell ice cream. 
‘Skully says, Grigorenchikha's become your squeeze, right?’
‘Tell Skully her name is Natalie.’
‘Okay, whatever. Then invite her too.’

Natalie agreed quite easily and we went all together: Kuba, Skully, I and Natalie.
When we got off the train and were discussing where to – the Bay Beach or the Lake at the pine grove; Natalie suggested crossing the Seim, there’s not as much of the madhouse as on the Bay Beach.
On the other bank of the Seim, there were huts too and those who arrived on Friday met theirs from the Saturday morning train and took them over the river. 
They could ferry us just for asking.
And it happened the way she predicted, probably, because it was her to ask the boat guy for a ride. 

It was an excellent day.
We found a sandy glade in the willow thicket quite close to the river and some hundred meters from the huts.
On the soft white sand, we spread the only bed cover we had because only Natalie was clever enough to bring it along. 
When she changed into her two-piece swimsuit she overshadowed the entire ‘Film a Divadlo’ because with such lush breasts and rounded hips she had a surprisingly slender waist.

For bathing, we went to the beach by the huts with the boats tied to the bank. 
Natalie preferred sitting in one of them but Kuba, Skully and I got as furious as in old good days on Kandybino. 
Then we ate sandwiches, drank lemonade and went over to the sunbathing.

The bedspread on the sand had room only for two: for Natalie as it was she who brought it and for me because it was I who she was going out with.
She was lying on her back wearing black sunglasses and I on my stomach being embarrassed with my trunks sticking out because of the erection.
My sidekicks lay stretched out on the hot sand (also on their stomachs) fitting their improvident heads to the corners of the bedspread at our feet.
And – sultry silence…

Of course, the next weekend just two of us went to that place.

And again we lay on the bedspread in the midst of the silent heat.
Mute and motionless were the long leaves of the young pliant willows around the oval glade.
Only two of us and the sand and the sun crouching over from the sky.
My eyes were closed because I did not have sunglasses but the sun still seeped in through the blood-red fog of my dropped eyelids to turn into a black headache. 
‘A headache,’ heard I myself, barely audible.
The red mist darkened and I felt inexpressible delight – she put her palm on my eyelids.
Without opening my eyes I found her wrist and silently pulled downwards sliding her palm onto my lips.
I was so grateful to that tender soft palm that had driven away my pain and brought the inexplicable bliss.
There was nothing better in the whole world.

But when she leaned on her elbow and hovered her face over mine and merged her lips with my lips I found out that there was still something better only that it had no name.
Kiss?
When you melt and dissolve in the font of the meeting lips, when you drown in their immensity and, at the same time, you soar…
All that and a whole ocean of completely indescribable feeling…
Just one syllable of four letters expresses all that inembraceableness?
Well, well…
Anyway, the syllable was fairly busied by us that summer day.

And when we were already going to the huts for a boat ride to be in time for the train, I stopped her amidst the willow trees to kiss once again.
The parting kiss, we would be able to go on kissing any further.
She answered the kiss with her tired lips and then, looking aside, said with a strange sadness:
‘Silly one. You’ll get cloyed with it.’
I did not believe her…

(...a German smartie, by the name of Bismarck, once flashed with a witticism:
‘Only fools learn by personal experience, I prefer to learn from the experience of others.’

“I did not believe her...”
But even from my personal experience, I should have learned that my sister, Natasha, being younger than me for two years, surpassed my knowledge and repeatedly proved that.
Yes, I’m anything but Bismarck with my distrust to others.
A little consolation is that I am not a fool as defined in his maxim since I never get wiser even from my own experience.
I wonder what category then should I attribute myself to? 
Okay, let’s not get distracted; now this question is off the topic…)

The cucumbers utterly cloyed.
Already reluctantly, simply because of having nothing better to do I would take one from the boxes, bite a couple of times and hurl into the nearest thicket of tall grass in the grounds of the Vegetable Base.

So I also left the race and went to the ORS Office to quit.
I was paid fifty rubles for a month and a half.
For the first time in life, I held such a sum in my hands. 
Was that enough for a scooter?
Who should know?

A talk with Mother canceled those questions:
‘Seryozha, school is starting. You need clothes.
Shoes are needed for you and your brother and sister.
You know yourself how we’re scratching along.’
‘Yes! I have clothes! And I told you why I was going to the Base.’
‘Those pants that I have painted two times? Is that your clothes?
At your age, it's a shame to go about like that.' 

Mustang of my Dreams! Farewell! 
We won't rush along the Peace Avenue, you and me, overtaking all those ‘Rigas' and ‘Desnas'… 

No ready-made pants were bought for me.
Instead, following Mother’s instructions, I went to the sewing workshop near the Bus Station.
The dressmaker with a long pointed nose measured me and sewed trousers from a dark gray synthetic Lavsan.
Wide, two-button belt.
Flares.
Fifteen rubles.

Very soon the trousers came in handy.
Vladya brought the news that in the Central Park there would be the Youth Song Contest.
The prospective participants were to enroll at the City Komsomol Committee.
Arthur would also participate.

Arthur was an Armenian who served in the construction battalion next to RepBase and Vladya was his fan. 
Arthur was a right-handed guitarist and played it like like a god in Vladya’s estimation.
He was not replacing the strings, he was just turning a common guitar the opposite way, with the bass strings below and the thin ones up and played it! 
In addition to the miraculous trick, Arthur also sang. 
No wonder Vladya idolized him and had no doubt that Arthur would be the first in the contest.
But we still decided to participate. 
Together.
Vladya and me.

As the Head of School Komsomol familiar with the location of offices in the City Komsomol Committee, I had to go there to apply for the contest and know the exact time and place for it. 
It was to be held on the Dance-Floor of the Central Park in only two days.
We had no time to lose and started rehearsals.

The Club Movie Projectionist, Boris Konstantinovich, switched on the light in the auditorium and also two microphones on the stage.
One of them we inserted into Vladya’s guitar through the sound hole.
From the powerful loudspeakers installed on both sides of the stage, there roared such a cool sound that Boris Konstantinovich could not stand it and left. 
In his place, joyfully excited Glushcha came running in from the Professions Street where he had got enthralled by the uproar of that jumble when passing by the Club. 

We decided to do two numbers.
First, the bass guitar part to the song ‘Chocolate Cream’ by the Polish rock-group ‘Chervony Guitary’, and then the song from the movie ‘Uncatchable Avengers’.

At the rehearsals everything went pretty smoothly: the guitar with the mic in its body after turning out a classic rock’n’roll piece,  was transformed into a common acoustic one to accompany Vladya’s singing that there were a lot of paths in the field but the truth was just one.
And I stood by Vladya’s side strumming my guitar...

Surprises began at the Contest itself.
In the concha of the Dance-Floor stage, there was only one microphone installed. 
That's a starter. 
Our duo needed to be named somehow.
Another ‘oops’.
The Second Secretary of the City Komsomol Committee offered a choice: ‘The Sun’ or ‘The Troubadours’.
Of the two evils was chosen the shorter.

Inserting a microphone into an acoustic guitar through the sound hole is not an easy undertaking.
You should loosen a couple of thin strings from below and shove the mic into the hole under them and then tune the strings.
Now, with the rock’n’roll started, how could I possibly shout into the Vladya’s guitar hole that we were ‘The Sun’ duo?
For the second number the same crap only in the opposite direction with getting the mic out.

The full logistics of the situation dawned on us when we were on the stage in front of the dense crowd bordered with the light of lamps around the Dance-Floor.
Vlady panicked:
‘To hell both them and their contest!’
And I began to convince him that there was no turning back since we popped up there with our guitars.
Or, maybe, we were sort of just walking them around?

Vladya started the bass part trying to raise his guitar closer to the microphone in which I announced that we’re the vocal-instrumental duo ‘The Sun’.
Then I lowered the microphone to his guitar so that they could hear on the Dance-Floor and make sure that it was ‘The Chocolate Cream’ indeed.
It's only that holding the microphone I could no longer support his bass part as a rhythm guitar. 

With the second number, everything seemed to be in the groove. 
We both strummed our guitars, Vladya sang, I was looking above the heads of the crowd as Raissa taught us in the Children Sector…
But after the verse and the chorus Vladya turned to me with rounded eyes and moaned:
‘I forgot the lyrics!’
The further, the merrier!
May Chuba forgive me and may forgive me the listeners of the contest who that evening filled the Dance-Floor to the utmost but I took a step forward and yelled to the microphone that:
   ‘Over wide empty steppe
    Raven soars in vain,
    We’ll be living for ages,
    We are not raven’s prey...’

By the next verse, Vladya snapped back and we finished the song off together, in a duo, as it was promised. 
