
Natalie and I did not go to the Seim anymore.
We fell out, I really did not understand why.
In general, she told me not to come again.
Of course, I suffered painfully, and, of course, I was happy when in half a month my sister, aka Red-Haired, said:
‘I saw Grigirenchikha today. So she asks, “Did Ogoltsoff go somewhere or what?”. I say, “No”. She says, “Then why does he not come?”.
Have you quarreled or what?' 
‘We did not quarrel... Kiddy! You’re the sun!’

The swimming season was already over and we started to have walks to the Plant Park.
She led me there and showed a secluded bench behind the untrimmed bushes along the alley. 
I had passed that alley more than once but never knew about that bench.
It stood as if in a grotto of foliage.

There we came with the start of dusk.

Rare yellowish lamps switched on in the alleys.
The brightest bulb marked the window of the ticket office in the summer cinema projection booth.
The projectionist Grisha Zaychenko, Konstantin Borisovich’s partner, launched in his booth the tape recorder connected to the loudspeakers.
It was the same tape:

  ‘The twilight shadowed the light of day.
  Is it day or night? I can’t say...’

Then the ticket office bulb went out and the séance began.
The bench in its cave of leaves got wrapped in the darkness.
By that moment our talk was running out.

She threw her head back leaning on my arm stretched out along the upper beam of the bench and the world ceased to exist.
Especially if she came without a bra and in the dress with a long zipper in front...
But anything has its limits and when immersed into another dimension, my palm slid down her belly beneath the navel and touched the elastic band of her panties her head on my shoulder moved discontentedly and she issued a sound as if she was about to awaken. 
I unquestioningly moved over to the treasures above.

Then the séance ended.
The bulb over the ticket office flashed on again.
We waited while the handful of film-goers would pass along the alley before we rose from the bench.
Devastating inebriety.
She must go... 
Dad has told...
No later than...

The world mired in the depth of autumn too soon.
It became cold, naked, damp.
The leaves fell down and the wet black branches hid the bench no longer.
And who would get seated in the wet?
We, by inertia, still went to the Park, but it too became hostile.
Once, in broad daylight, a mujik in his mid-thirties started to bully me.
I had no chance against him.
It’s good that some guys from our school called him to have a drink behind the Dance-Floor and we went away in the meanwhile.

Then the first snow fell.
It melted for the slush to get fixed with the frost.
The snow had fallen again and the winter started.
On one of the dating evenings when I unbuttoned her coat to make my way to the beloved breasts, she recoiled and said she could not allow everything to a man who, in fact, was no one to her.
Was it me that no one?!
After all that had been between us?!

Sorting out the toppled relations is just firing of the stern cannons after the ship sailing away...
We broke up.
Fare thee well, sweetest Natalie.

"Ah, tender buds killed by the cruel frosts…"

At the end of February, a year after I told Mother that I agreed to be operated on, I had to lie under the knife.
A man should be the master of his word, ain’t it?

Starting in the evening and all night long my stomach ached sharply and the ambulance called in the morning diagnosed the appendix that had to be removed before too late.

I walked to the vehicle myself but there I had to lie down in the low canvas stretcher that stood on the floor.
Mother also wanted to go but along the Nezhin Street, there was walking an acquaintance of hers who was late for her work and Mother gave her place to her. 
She had always praised Julia Semyonovna as a very good legal consultant.

In the City Hospital, with all the urgency of my diagnosis, they were too lazy to carry me on the stretcher and I had to walk up to the second floor myself. 
There I changed into the hospital blue gown and went on foot to the operation room.
They helped me to lie on the tall table and with wide belts fixed my extremities to it.
A white sheet was thrown over a tall frame above my face so that I could not see what they were doing down there.
A nurse, whom I also could not see, stood behind my head and asked all sorts of distracting questions.
The interview served as a substitute for the general anesthesia because I was given only a local anesthetic with a syringe in my stomach. 
The injection worked.

I felt and understood that they were cutting me down there but all that was perceived in a somewhat distanced way as if they were doing it to my pants although at that moment I had nothing but a hospital shirt on me. 
Only at the end, a sharp pain pierced me several times and I even groaned through my teeth.
The nurse behind my head started to praise my manly endurance, she had never seen such a patient of such a mettle.
So I had to shut up and let them finish their business in silence.
But to a cot in the long corridor, I was taken on a gurney, after all. 

Two days later they brought me a note from Vladya.
He wrote that he was down in the reception hall but they did not let him pass through and our class would come to see me when I was allowed to get up and I should recover as soon as possible because Chuba had got violently untamed and kept jumping at Vladya like a Mazandaran tiger. 

After the surgery, I was recommended to currently restrain coughing and avoid any straining so that the seams did not go apart.
But could you really avoid it when having such friends?
‘Chuba Maza..’ And I crumpled the paper slip in my fist and stuck my face into the pillow to restrain the rolling up laughter.
‘Mandara.. tiger.’ 
Haha! Haha! 
‘Ouch! It hurts!’
I had already finished reading it yet could not avoid recollecting the rough lines.
‘Tiger Chuba Mazanda...’ 
Haha! Haha!
And tears sprinkled from my eyes. 
Vladya! You're worse than a tiger, son of a bitch!

Ten days later I was discharged and in one more week came to the hospital for them to pull the stitches thread from my stomach and give me the reference releasing from PE for one month...

By the by, Vladya’s handwriting was a champion of indecipherableness.
The written essays he handed in were customarily returned by the Literature teacher gashed crisscross with the red ink pen. 
At times he couldn’t make out himself what he had written and called me for help.
I was the expert arbitrator in his cryptographic disputes with Zoya Ilyinichna:
‘No, it’s not a mistake, he always writes ‘e’ that way and it stands for "a" by him.’
‘What "e"? What "a"? they’re just ticks!’
‘Yes, for sure, but that tick’s tail is a bit longer. See?’

There happened a rough talk between me and Father.
He said I should have my hair cut, for it was already long as hard to say what.
At work, he was summoned to the Political Officer, aka Zampolit, because of my looks. 
The RepBase repaired not just helicopters, but military ones that's why instead of Directors or Managers they had high-rank officers and Zampolit was the Deputy Commander of the RepBase. 
So Zampolit just ordered Father that his son would no longer be a frightful sight in the city. 

Of course, I had a yearning for as long hair as that by the Beatles.
Their ones were beyond the reach, sure thing, but my hair already started to touch to the top of the shoulder blades when I threw my head back.
At a recent CJI match, I performed the Dean Reed's hit ‘Jerico' hopping on the stage with a muted mike and whipping my face with my hair. 
One good whipping deserved another.
How would the RepBase Zampolit know that I was a son of their worker?
As if there few other Beatles fans hanging out around the city... 
I had been told on no doubt.

I couldn’t have words with Father for long because I was sitting on his neck and Zampolit threatened to fire him if I kept my hair...

In the spring our school was flooded with infection.
The most rampant manifestations of it were registered in our class. 
That was the locale of its acutest forms and main dispensers... 

Vladya and I sat on stools behind the last desk.
The seats in them were painted black and had a longish hole in the middle to insert your hand when carrying to another place.
When we got bored with wood carving and the black seats of our stools bore deep white scars that cried out: Beatles! Rolling Stones! – we looked around – what else could be done?
Some unlimited naivety: what could you do in a graduating class?
Actually, nothing...

Still and yet we found a shebang to avoid the boredom, we started writing poetry. 
It was an abundant poetic eruption turned out in various forms and genres.
At the break, we showed our creations to the classmates. 
We laughed and they were laughing too unaware that the poetizing virus started the inexorable destruction of their immune system… 
Many of them began trying their hand at rhymed lines production.
Even Chuba had epigramed some trifle.
But the indisputable crest-riders of that wave were sitting, sure enough, at the last desk. 
Fortunately, the epidemic had passed without fatalities.

(...if those scattered pieces of ruled paper torn off various notebooks were put together it could become a collection of aspirant poets.
And, stashed away in bookstores stacks, it would accumulate the dust mixed with its drowsy dreams of eager readers' hands and rising to the fame… 
It's quite unlikely that any of my classmates would recollect that rampant epidemic. 
No one would know even their own lines, you bet.
But then what for?
The final goal is nothing. The main buzz’s in doing.
Though, I’m still not ashamed for the lengthy elegy I crafted at an Organic Chemistry lesson:

“The day will come for me to join the robbers
In their arduous pursuit the daily bread
I’ll sleep all day and chew on dried grasshoppers
And in the third shift, I'll stray walkers intercept…" 

Then, of course, I got killed because elegy is a sad genre and, lying in the roadside tall grass: 

“I won’t grasp it with my head by nearing Death already chilled
If there really was a need for you to get me killed?
Of wood  was made my pistol, it wouldn't harm a lamb,
With friendly ‘Hey!’ I started the job
Of ripping kopecks for a tram,
Then – gentle 'Adieu!’ and parting bob...”

A lot of water has flowed in the Varanda since then and, quoting the classic poet from the banks of the Neva river, nicknamed Monkey:
 "Some of them are not there anymore, and I am far away..." 

Okay.
That’s enough for flashing up my speckles of erudition...

It’s time to confess that I wasn’t a stranger to swindling too.
There are things you’d like to stop remembering before starting to retell…
However, showing oneself off entirely good and irreproachable is foolish and dishonest. 
A not righteous thing, I mean. 

I am not good, I am different…)

So, the CJI final that year we lost to the prestigious School 11.
In the Greeting Contest, we dragged out on stage a dummy ship, exactly the same as two months before us, they dragged out at the Central Television CJI. 
And they also joked our jokes there two months before.
The team of School 11 came out in black top hats of Whatman paper and at the end of their Greeting presented them to our team.
I did not get my share because their Captain left his on the jury desk to help them make the right decision.

After the defeat, going home without shields but with top hats, our team went home doffing the paper head-gears for ‘goodbye' at the Settlement crossroads and I felt hurt that I didn't have one. 
Only two of all the team reached the tram stop by our school – Valya Pisanko and me. 
And then I insidiously asked Valya for her top hat as if interested to just try it on.
She credulously gave it and I clapping it onto my head ran away along the Nezhin Street.
I knew she wouldn’t follow, she lived in Podlipnoye and had to go in the opposite direction. 
Indeed, she didn’t chase and only screamed behind:
‘Sehguey! Give it back! It’s not fair!’
I knew it was not fair, but I did not return and did not give it back.
Why should I?
Next morning in the lean-to that served as my bedroom now, I was nauseated by just looking at it.
A piece of Whatman paper blackened with gouache. 
Disgusting loot.

(..so, I’m different and meanness has its share of me too…)

So, the ten years were over.
But I could not judge whether the term was long or short because ten years later it had been quite another me. 
Ten years before I was exposed to the educational system which started to make of me a member useful for the society.
I tend to think that the didactic cultivators, in general, achieved the set goal.

I grew up from a snotty Octoberist to the Head of School Komsomol Committee.
I realized that spitting into the sky, with universal gravitation in place, is meaningless.
Even though I did not have enough of Komsomol ardor to sing ‘International' together with the gramophone record of it by the Bolshoi Academic Choir, I still had no doubt that the USSR was the bulwark of peace throughout the world. 
It’s enough to just recall those red flags with the yellow dove.

And, generally, we were the best in everything and the only thing where we lagged behind was music.
Any song by the Beatles had more interesting chord sequence than the entire Soviet song production.
All the songs by us were in A-minor.

If only the Beatles would not go into politics.
John Lennon shouldn’t say that the Soviet Union was a fascist regime.
Twenty million people were killed by fascists not in England but in our country.
Why can’t the Beatles mind just music?
However, Furtseva was a nasty bitch because she did not let them have a tour of the Union.
She just enjoyed their performance behind the closed doors and then:
‘Sorry, guys, but our listener will not understand your music.' 
After they had been preparing and wrote their hit ‘Back to the USSR'. 

As for the school curriculum, I did not comprehend chemistry at all, as well as algebra with trigonometry and a number of other subjects for which I did not have time enough.
Yet I was trained to distinguish landlord Famusov from its creator, writer Gribiyedov.
Was not that a sufficient base of knowledge for entering a bright life? 
Anyway, it was too late to supplement. The time was up.
The final exams and Graduation Evening with the subsequent romantic meeting of the graduates with the dawn of their new life were at hand.

But all of that was only a background overshadowed by a more important matter. 
We were preparing for the contest.
That time the city Komsomol leadership was organizing a contest for the best vocal-instrumental ensemble, aka VIA. 
Wanted a VIA? 
You’ll get the VIA!

All winter we had been making electric guitars after the drawings in ‘The Radio’ and ‘The Young Technician’ magazines.
Long before they had announced their competition.

We experimented with the installation of piezo elements on a common acoustic guitar.
The sound amplified as if there was a mike sitting in its body, but it was not an electric guitar sound.
Besides, the guitars for seven rubles and fifty kopecks did not look like those on black and white pictures of different rock-groups with their hair reaching below the shoulders. 

Do you want a guitar with a horny body? 
Cut it out of three-centimeter thick plywood. 

Most of the fuss was with the necks.
Those that we had made, following the drawings in the technicians' magazines, left the guitars untunable.
What is ‘untunable'? 
Well, if you pluck a guitar string pressed at the twelfth fret and then pluck the same string released, you get the same note, only over one octave. 
And we did not have the same notes. The guitars were untunable.
That’s what it meant.

We had to fall back to the necks of common guitars.
They tuned okay but the headstock of a common guitar with its slots for strings looked ridiculous on an electric guitar, like a saddle on top a cow.
To replace the headstock in the neck you have to saw it out and substitute with a homemade, solid one with no slots and all six or four tuning pegs in one row. 
Father soldered the electrical rigging of guitars according to the schemes in magazines.
He also procured shielded cable within braided metal strands to connect the guitar to the amplifier. 
Without such a cable electric guitars send forward a terrible noise miles away from any music.

Testing was carried out in our hutta where the product in progress was being connected to the ancient radio receiver.
Father said if it worked there then with a normal amplifier there would be no problem at all.
The pickups presented a major headache. 
A pickup is a tiny box installed under the strings with an individual coil for each one.
A coil was six hundred spirals of a cobweb fine copper wire wound by hand.
Now remains only multiply by the number of strings.


Eventually, everything got assembled.
The radio receiver, on the verge of bursting up from randomly picked fragments of popular guitar breaks, sent forth deafening steely chords.
Mother’s yells from the kitchen not heard at all.
We’re delighted. The bomb!
Father seemed glad too...

Now you can disassemble everything, level the body plywood with a sandpaper.
Putty it and polish again with a finer sandpaper.
Paint the body with a spray gun (I bet you’ll paint it red).
Assemble your shiny new electric guitar.
Enjoy!

As a result, for participation in the contest organized by the City Komsomol Committee, there were submitted two applications. 
In order of applying:
1) from VIA ‘Kristall’ at the House of Culture named after Lunacharsky (aka the Loony);
2) from VIA ‘Orpheuses’ at the Club of Konotop Engine and Car Repairing Plant (aka Club KaPeVeRrZe).

The guys from the Loony were in the business for years.
They had an electric organ played by Sasha Basha, who had graduated the class of piano at the Music School.
He was the leader in their VIA and also the Captain of the CJI team from the prestigious School 11.
In addition to the concerts at the Loony, they also played 'the trash' – that is musical accompaniment at weddings, birthdays, parties. 
One organ, two guitars, the percussion.

There were four of us too, we didn’t know a damn thing from the music theory, except for Chuba who four years attended the class of button-accordion at the Music School, but we were backed by the Club.
Our hutta served the base for technical empowering of The Orpheuses, the Club provided means for our musical education.
(Which again does not include Chuba with his button-accordion that let him easily master the bass guitar parts, they, generally, coincide with those played in the bass section of the accordion with the musician's left hand.)

So, the concert of Classical Guitar in the Club, announced by a modest poster about the classical guitar performer Zverev from the Kiev Philharmonic, was attended by just two Orpheuses – Vladya and me. 
Skully did not feel he need it either because he’s a drummer...

It the lobby of the Club was unusually crowded, and so was the landing at the auditorium entrance.
Young guys for the most part.
Who would have thought that the Settlement youth were so much fond of the guitar classics!
So we stood up there in the crowd when from below along the wide steps of the stair and amidst the guys around us there rustled of low-voiced announcement to each other, like a gust of wind rushing in front of the thunderstorm:
‘Waflisters! Waflisters are coming!’
Two girls came up the wide stairs from the first floor.
As they reached the landing, there reigned a complete silence but all the glances were riveted to them.
I was struck by the milk-white purity of the skin on their faces.
Surrounded by the wall of goggling silence they turned to the right – towards the mirrored hall of the Ballet Studio of the Club. 
That evening the seminarists from GPTU-4 had a party there...

And we, Vladya and I, turned to the left with a handful of those who came for the concert of the Guitarist Laureate in a classic black suit and thick black-rimmed glasses.
All of the listeners sat in a pair of front rows giving a wide berth to each other.
He sat above us in a chair on the edge of the stage, announced the music pieces and played them on his acoustic.
But that was more than playing!
Something unimaginable!
 Unattainable...

After the concert, Vladya and I knocked on the door of the room on the first floor where he was putting his classic black suit into the hard black case of his guitar. 
We introduced ourselves as willing to learn the guitar playing.
What to do? How to begin?
And he gave us a free consultation. 
He took out his instrument from under the suit in his case and showed some tricky picks.
Then he folded everything back and went to the Station to go elsewhere through the dark of night.
But before leaving the room, he advised us to find Polish music magazines.
They were printing a lot of music with chords above the lyrics.
However, no such magazines were to be found in Konotop then...
