
After applying for the contest we came to the Director of the Club, Pavel Mitrofanovich.
We explained that our needs were not exorbitant: just that pair of black speakers from the portable movie projector, with their amplifier because we did not yet have a place for rehearsals, to let alone a drum set to hold high the Club honor at the City Contest. 
Flaring his redly hot face under the crisp coils of natural merchant curls, Pavel Mitrofanovich proclaimed that for the guys from the Settlement the Club would do everything and then everything again.
That is the meaning of coming at the right time. 

Director ordered the House Manager, Stepan, to give us the room of the Variety Ensemble until after the contest.
The Ensemble musicians supervised by their Head, Aksyonov moved their instruments from there, including the double bass and saxophone to the unknown destination. 
Aksyonov himself also disappeared for some time. 
In the room, there remained only a giant desk, a piano and ‘the kitchen' – a drum set of the kicker, the snare, the hat and two tom-toms. 

Skully was practicing the beat for hours with all his hands and feet over the kitchen.
The technique of beat-drumming was shown to him by Anatoly Melai who that spring returned from the army and who before the service had played horn in the Variety Ensemble.
He also showed us the chords to the ‘Yellow River' by the rock-group ‘Christie'. 

At that time the song topped most of the European music charts.
We knew about it from the station ‘Radio-Sweden'. 
They were broadcasting in Russian one hour a week, on Sundays and ours did not drown it with the radio noise because they talked exclusively about rock music without any propaganda. 
Anatoly even knew Russian adaptation of the lyrics:

  ‘We roamed at the Yellow River
  The flowers blossomed all ‘round us
  By the river of my dream –
  Alloverida!’

And then followed the refrain  without adaptation:
  ‘ Alloverida! Alloverida!
   Yuza mom-ma! Yuza mom-ma!’

We started to rehearse it for the contest.
At some point, it dawned on me that if the song was called ‘Yellow River' then the chorus also should be ‘Yellow River!' and not some indistinct ‘Alloverida'. 
So, it was not in vain that Alla Iosifovna was driving home to me that ‘London is the capital of Great Britain’.

Anatoly wrinkled his nose in displeasure but had no trumps to answer my demarche.
For my linguistic feat Chuba allowed me to sing a backup in the chorus: 
  ‘ Yellow River! Yellow River! 
    is in my mind and in my eyes.’

That immensely inspired me because in our VIA I had the very necessary but so inconspicuous role of the rhythm guitarist.
For the second number, we took ‘Paint it black' by the Rolling Stones. 
We knew the chords to it and we knew its name, but we did not know the lyrics and used dummy ‘pa-ba’ like seasoned scat singers:
   ‘Pa-bá pa-bá pa-bá pa-bá
   Pa-bá pa-bá pá-ba-baá

But from the name, you could guess what the song was about and if you know the meter of the lines – full ahead! 

‘Black clouds squeezed the whole sky over the city
The drops of rain from them are blacker than black tar
No stars reflected in black puddles not big nor bitty
Black fog has stolen them and hidden very far...’

(.. in the movie ‘The Devil’s Advocate’ where Al Pacino plays the Prince of Dark this song sounds on the closing credits, the original, of course.
But at that time it was too early for Hollywood to shoot that movie.
And, by the by, with that production of ‘Yellow River’ our garage VIA outstripped ‘The Jolly Guys’ of Alexander Buynov.
They performed it a year or two later and by them, it became a song about Carlson on the roof: 
‘Here we hear,
Here we hear,
The motor buzz,
The cheerful buzz.
High in the air
Straight from the roof
Our dear friend
Is flying to us...’

Thus a love song was transformed into the hymn of the RepBase…)

On the eve of the contest, we rehearsed for days on end leaving the Club only for a midday meal at the pavilion ‘Meeting' by the Station square. 
We ate dumplings there and washed them down with a bottle of Zhigulyovsky beer shared by the four of us, and imagined we were the cool dudes who can play rock. 

Literally the day before the contest our rivals—‘The Kristall’ VIA from the Loony—dealt us a preemptive strike.
They came to play ‘the trash’ at the graduation party of our class.
We had been offering our school leadership our free service of play music at the party our proposal was blinked at and they invited ‘The Kristall’.
In our native school, we were not considered musicians! 
No prophet in his native land, indeed.

Of course, ‘The Kristall’ had a well-established reputation.
Sasha Basha, educated at the piano class of the music school, played his organ very competently – both ‘seven-forty’, and waltz, and rock’n’roll, but still, it hurt.

The hour of retaliation struck at the contest.
We had hidden reserves.
Firstly, Pavel Mitrofanovich allowed us to grab for the occasion the 50-watt amplifier.
Secondly, we even visually looked the winners.

Okay, let's say you've got an electric organ and music education plus a team of musicians trained at 'trash-playing, but who would care a damn about all that when: 
‘And now in this cozy Central Park Summer Cinema we invite on the stage vocal-instrumental ensemble ‘The Orpheuses'!!' 
And there come four guys on stage with three (!) horned (!!) guitars!!!
And, on top of that, they themselves, all four are…
...IN WHITE PANTS!!!..

What meant white pants in Konotop of 1971?
There is no way to explain it because of that was long before the rise of the denim civilization. 


Where did the white pants come from?
In the Department Store opposite the Main Post, they were selling the so-called 'canvas for household needs', one ruble twenty kopecks per meter. 
From the very first wash, the fabric turned into gray saggy burlap but we came out on the stage before any wash. 

Mother made those pants—all the four—with her sewing machine two days before the performance. 
The then pants fashion rejected the wide waist belt in favor of no belt at all, the pants were starting from the hips. 
One meter and ten centimeters of ‘canvas’ were more than enough for a pair of trousers.

The only bad news was that I screwed up my part in the ‘Yellow River’ vocals.
During the rehearsals, Chuba kept frowning at my third in the chorus backup and in the last chant before going on to the stage he grabbed his head in desperation. 
So at the moment when we should be together yelling at a single microphone:
‘Yellow River! Yellow River!’
I just opened my mouth but did not produce any sound.
It was the same trick as singing the ‘Internationale' at the All-School Komsomol meetings or in the make-believe performing of ‘Jericho' at the CJI. 
Chuba made round eyes on the other side of the mike because of I left him without the third, but that did not help.
‘The Orpheuses’ won a convincing victory but on my vocal career was put the final cross.

Yes, we had done it!
And after that, we had to just live on…
‘Where to sail?' poetically asked Pushkin and Chernishevsky paraphrased the question in prose: 
‘What to do?’

"That is all,
Say ‘bye!’ to dreams
Live your life the way it seems
Right to you.
Find your answers,
Find your ways, 
Find your road to happiness.
Do it, do!"
     (music by V. Sakoon, lyrics by S. Ogoltsoff)

I tried looking for the happiness at the Kiev State University named after T. Shevchenko and took my school certificate over there, to the Department of English Language.
Unbelievable arrogance, no doubt, with all my knowledge amassed from a pair of grammar tables memorized from the English textbook for the eighth grade.

However, audacity gets rewarded and the whole ride from Konotop to Kiev (four hours by a local train) I spent on a seat next to Irina Kondratenko, the most beautiful girl in our class. 
With her black eyes and long black hair she was so beautiful that I’d never dare to approach her – it’s clear that it’s useless.
And suddenly—lo!—four hours riding together in an endless conversation.
She also was going to Kiev to become a student somewhere and live at her relatives’.
She prompted which tram to take from the station to the University.

There were so high ceilings there for all to see – it’s the place where they give the higher education.
At the dean's office, I left my certificate of secondary education and the reference about my excellent state of health and they gave me the address of a student hostel in about one hour's ride by a trolleybus. 

The manager, or just the dormitory attendant who gave me there the bed linen in exchange for my passport, showed certain racist tendencies.
When I entered her office or a stockroom, a pair of young Vietnamese came immediately after me asking for an oilcloth for the table in their room. 
And she answered:
‘No oddcloth for you! You’re an oddcloth yourself! Get out of here!’
And they left looking so puny against the background of that robust Ukranian racist.
I wondered if she was able to pronounce ‘oilcloth' in Vietnamese. 

Although, we shouldn’t jump to conclusions without knowing all the concurrent circumstances.
Maybe the happening had nothing to do with racism.
 I cannot be hundred percent sure that those Vietnamese were not asking for the fifth oilcloth on the same day or else that it wasn't the fifth pair of Vietnamese demanding an oilcloth from the overworked Ukrainian woman that day… 

Among my roommates, there was one more guy intending to matriculate the same English Department. 
Only he came for the exams after serving in the army. 
The next day we went to the University together for a pre-examination lecture. 
He was so fluent in talking with the lecturer and I felt like at that regional Physics competition, where they knew everything and understood each other and only I was an odd dolt around.
After the lecture, I went to the dean's office and took back my documents for enrollment. 

I do not remember what lie I told them.
It was hard to confess, that I got scared and surrendered without even trying. 
On the way to the hostel after my passport there poured such a shower that in some places the trolleybus had to swim from one stop to another.
The rain will wash away all the traces…
The four hours in the local train to Konotop I spent in silence – no Irinas Kondratenko for cowards.

In Konotop all complicated questions are getting resolved on the fly.

Whereto?
Well, there where all the others were. 
Follow and join.
Skully had been studying for two years at the Railway Transportation Technical School above the Over-Underpass.
Vladya and Chuba submitted their papers to enroll the same institution.
The question ‘whereto?’ was solved before me, I could only apply for admitting to the Koonotop Railway Transportation Technical School.

Even Anatoly Melai was there.
He got an indistinct job of a laboratory assistant, but before the start of the academic year he just walked the corridors there in blue overalls and was engaged in wiring when not singing. 
Anatoly turned out to be a fan of the VIA ‘Pesnyary’ who at a recent concert in the Kremlin Hall performed the ‘Dark Night’ song.
Can you imagine?
In the first row, all the top of the Political Bureau – Brezhnev, Suslov.. er.. who else? – Podgorny, and the guys from the stage with the electric guitar reverbing at full volume!. 
Well, and the vocals, of course! All their songs in no fewer intervals than for four voices:

‘The dark night's between 
 You and me, my beloved one...’

And Anatoly, throwing up his face in pockmarks from extinct acne, filled the empty corridor with singing one of those four voices.
And why not sing?
It’s summer and no classes, and the entrance exams hadn’t started yet, and he’s in his overall.

‘When I go to date you
 My bast shoes keep creaking...’

He promised to put in a word for us but of all the Orpheuses only one-third was admitted – Chuba and Vladya fell through and entered the Plant. 

In early August we made a proposal to the Club Director, Pavel Mitrofanovich, which he could not refuse.
We would play dances in the Plant Park.
For free.

In each of the three parks in the city of Konotop—the Central, the Loony, and the Plant Parks—there was a dance-floor.
All the three were replicas of each other: the high stage for a band under the concha above the concreted circle surrounded by a two-meter high fence of iron pipes set closely; the entrance gate (diametrically opposite the stage) of those pipes as well. 
Even the paint coat on all the three fences was the same gay silver.
The only difference was that the paint on the dance-floor fence in the Central Park had not peeled off so much.

Mother recalled that, when she was young, a brass band was playing at the Park Dancing-Floor in summer. 
Later, everything ground to halt and instead of waltzing in the warm season the young Konotopers began to walk in circles along the alleys of the Peace Square strewn with the spat out husk of the sunflower seeds... 

And then that August Sunday came when the Dancing-Floor of the Plant Park woke from its sleep benumbed.
Collapsed the gyves of rusty chain and iron padlock and we pulled the rubber-wheeled pull-barrow towards the stage.

Normally, the projectionist used that pull-barrow to transport cylindrical tin boxes with the reels of a film from the Club to the summer cinema in the Plant Park.
That August Sunday it was loaded with a stack of loudspeakers and amplifiers. 
We began to install and assemble the equipment, connecting, checking the guitars with a bang of a chord or two, picking the bass strings.

A short echo came back from the two-story squalid apartment block behind the park fence. 
From there also came racing local little boys and, not daring to enter the open circle of the Dance-Floor began to accumulate in the alley behind the iron pipe fence.

Now Skully, pompous and important, put his drummer ‘kitchen’ up, thumped the kick drum with the pedal beater, patted the hat with his sticks.
The finalizing check of the microphone:
‘One… One-two… One...’
Scully sat the tempo with the dry clicking of one stick against the other. 
One, two. One two three four!
Off we go!

That’s how the change of epochs was coming to pass in one separately taken Park.

The kids seeing there was no guard at the narrow gate, slowly infiltrated the Dance-Floor but still kept close to the pipes except for a couple of neglected toddlers.
Three girls entered and got seated under the fence on a bench without the backrest.
Some young pair came in.
Probably, that secluded bench had been occupied already.
One more pair...
Welcome, there's enough backless benches in the Dance-Floor...

There was no dancing the first evening.
We played for ourselves.
Then we dragged the equipment and instruments to the cinema ticket office on the first floor of the projectionist's booth. 
Everything repeated itself on Wednesday.
Yes! On Wednesday!
We played dances three times a week – Wednesday, Saturday, Sunday.

On Saturday, half an hour before the start, the Park alleys were unusually crowded.
Vitya Batrak, aka Slave, entered the open space of the Dance-Floor followed by his retinue of other guys from the Peace Square.
The ample curls of chestnut hair were scattered over the shoulders of his silk shirt in the color of the pirate flag.
The cuffs of the long sleeves – unbuttoned.
The collar followed the suit in being open down to the solar plexus.
Vitya started a picturesque debate about his wristwatch. 
The strap was unfastened, the watch tossed high in the air and clattered on the concrete of the Dance-Floor.
The guys got around to check: smashed up or still ticking?

Meanwhile, a stream of young people of both sexes began to flow in through the gate. 
That’s it!
The city believed that they played dances in the Park of KaPeVeRrZe!
On Sunday everyone danced.
In circles.

A circle of ten to fifteen dancers sprang up around two or three satchels laid on the concrete floor.
Each circle danced in its own style.
The high stage was a good viewing point.
In that circle, they were twisting.
In another, they were portraying speed skating runners: shuffling their feet over the floor with their hands clasped behind their backs. 
And over there they still were happy with the old good ‘seven-forty’.
At times one or another dancer issued a probing scream.

The following Saturday at the entrance to the Dance-Floor there emerged auntie Shura, the Controller, in her eternal helmet-kerchief. 
She kept explaining to the coming people – the admission was fifty kopecks. 
Vlady and I came up to auntie Shura.
We were outraged. 
What the heck!
The dances for free!
Auntie Shura remained unperturbed.
She was executing the Director’s order.
Vladya, lighting the twilight with his white short-sleeved turtleneck, shouts to everyone approaching from the steep stairway to the Under-Overpass to come in: dances for free! 
They do not listen to him and obediently plodded after the tickets.
Be like everyone else...

When people had been kept for so many years without even a brass band they would readily pay 50 kopecks for a blank movie-ticket with the printed price ‘35 kop.’
After the dances, when we brought the equipment back, the cashier told us that she had sold five hundred tickets.
The next day Pavel Mitrofanovich ordered to remove all the benches from the Dance-Floor so that more people would fit in.
It seems he was more of a merchant than I imagined.

What did we play?
Basically, instrumental pieces as on that LP disk of ‘The Singing Guitars’.
And the songs prepared for the contest were also sung but already without my third.

Sometimes, at the insistent request of the public, Quak would come up to the microphone to break all hell loose with ‘Shyzgara’.
He looked great with that long blonde hair of his and small mustache of an albino color.
Only that he made people to coax him so too long but then:
‘Shyzgara!’
And in response – a wild wail from several hundred throats:
‘Vaaaaaaaaaaaa!!!!!!’

(...you should have heard this song.
Sure you had, and more than once only without the lyrics.
The TV guys like to use it as a background soundtrack to advertising all kinds of female accessories.
And then the Dutch rock-group The Shocking Blue toured the whole world with practically just that one song of theirs - ‘Venus’.
And they became the group of the year, which no one expected, and neither did they.
Of course, their singer performed the hit singing:
‘She's a goddess!' 
But Quak’s ‘oddclothy’ pronunciation did not prevent anybody from being carried away and yelling:
‘Vaaaaaaaaaaaa!!!!!!’
I mean that true and high art finds a way to the masses and ignites response in their hearts in spite of any accent.
Shyzgara!!!..)

And the masses got more and more condensed.
When in the middle of the dance evening we were announcing a short break I had for a long time to push through to reach the exit and then go down a side path leading to the long booth of whitewashed planks with the letters ‘M' and ‘F' above its two separated parts. 
And – back to the stage!
There Chuba was already picking random notes at his bass guitar making to tremble the front side of the big box of the loudspeaker from the summer cinema. 

Skully’s current girlfriends with the girlfriends of theirs stacked their shoulder bags behind that loudspeaker.
Yes, from the Orpheuses' bohemia Skully had the most frantic success among the girls. 
What do girls find in those drummers?
I, for example, just one time saw some blonde Irina home.
It's hard to say who of us cooled down quicker – she, having to wait so long until I with guys was dragging the equipment to the ticket office, or I by the fact that she lived in Zagrebellya.


Then she was picked up by Anatoly Melai and he generally escorted her by a taxi.
After the driver pulled up to her gate, Anatoly, getting out with her, would ask the chauffeur: 
‘Chief, when the meter ticks up to one ruble, honk to me, okay?’
Because Zagrebellya was a rough area for those in love…

Well, one time Kolya Pevriy came up to me.
When at school he was bullying me, I even started to figure out how much I still had to endure before he would leave after the eighth grade and enter the ‘seminary’.
And now he came up with full respect and asked to go out from the Dance-Floor to his classmate Valya who also was a year older than me.
She was going somewhere to be operated from an inborn heart defect and wanted to talk to me. 
I went out when it was the break after a half-time, stopped by her side. 
We both were silent, she sighed, then the break was over.
Some romantic date…

(..how did we play?
That question I can answer with just one word –
      LOUD!!!

Oh, the poor tenants of the two-story block right over the Park fence!. 

At the beginning of the third millennium, the King of Spain asked the Jews to forgive that their ancestors, five hundred years ago, were deported from the land of Spain. 
Better late than never…

Forgive us, o, tenants, for making you deaf three times a week! 
Never again will we be doing so...)

But the life of the Club was not fixed on the Dancing-Floor alone.
The Head of the Variety Ensemble, fair-haired saxophonist Aksyonov, popped up again and integrated us into his band to accompany the singer Zhanna Parasyuk in concerts of the Plant Amateur Activities. 
