
One of the rehearsals was held on the stage in the summer cinema of the Plant Park.
With the white screen pulled aside because of the open-air cinema season had just run out, we worked before the empty benches of the auditorium.
The song, sure thing, in A-minor:
  ‘Icy ceiling, creaky door –
  In the Winter-Mommy’s hut...’

Twilight was thickening when from the tunnel entrance under the projectionists' booth, there came two girls and a guy with them, but too young for a boyfriend. 

I thought that on seeing the empty auditorium they would go out.
But, no, they sat somewhere in the fifth row.
The audience of three is also an audience.
One girl had long dark hair but was fat.
The other was what you would need for a girl, in a mini-skirt and checkered waistcoat. 
Her hair was wavy but short and yellow, you could see at once that it’s painted.
And she so composedly, not trying to conceal, took a cigarette pack out from her waistcoat and lit one up.
Skully’s girlfriends were always looking back and hiding their cigarettes when they smoked.

So they sat down there while we went on with another take when the girl with the cigarette turned to the fat girl and spoke up.
Of course, I couldn’t hear that she talking about me:
‘That one will be mine. Wanna bet?’

When we finished the youngster came up to me on the stage:
'That girl wants have a word with you.’
In a minute I was by their side in the fifth row.
Olga, Sveta – oh, how nice!
And in half an hour I was escorting her and her girlfriend home.
Not far at all, some two hundred meters from the Park, the third back-alley in the Budyonny Street when going to the Swamp.

 And Skully with Quak also plodded along.
Something's not fitting the picture – she got one girlfriend by her side and those two had clung along with us.
Who’s escorting whom?

As we turned into the back-alley Sveta said ‘bye!' and entered the yard of her hutta. 
Olga and I proceeded to the wicket of the next one, where she said she lived in.
But Skully and Quak stuck fast and went along inserting their silly cues in our conversation.
And only when I and Olga started kissing they realized they had no chance of making hay there.
They crossed to the opposite fence, urinated on it under the street lamp (some bohemia, damn it!) and left with a flea in their ear.
As if they couldn’t keep their taking a leak for the Budyonny Street.

How come Quak was at the rehearsal?
Very simple, the singer Zhanna Parasyuk was his own sister...

The concerts by Amateur Activity participants were performed not in the Club only.
Sometimes they were held in different villages of the Konotop District, going there by the Plant bus of the PAZ brand.
It was for one of those concerts that we rehearsed the icy ceiling with the creaking door.

Since the PAZ bus was not made of rubber you couldn't carry amplifying equipment with you and there was no room for the young snowflakes from the Ballet Studio. 
Just one Ukrainian ‘Hopack' and one Moldovan ‘Jock' under the button-accordion of Aida. 
Then she handed the instrument to Chuba to play his part in the Variety Ensemble band.
My role in the Ensemble was that of a rhythm guitarist with a common acoustic guitar.
Vladya was not assimilated into the Variety Ensemble because Aksyonov, with his saxophone, didn't need a solo-guitar.
And Skully remained the drummer, with his ‘kitchen’ minimized to the skeleton composition – the snare and the hat to pat his sticks upon.

Murashkovsky was the universally recognized cream of the program; singing songs and telling ‘humoreskas’.
The rhymed stories about ‘me and my koom', were his specialty.
About how we, together with the koom, aka sister-in-law’s husband,  smashed the football goal clean away with koom's head, and riding a motorcycle collided with a bull and the bull threw us over the oak-tree just for free…
Simple rhyme, solid wit. 
The audience liked it – they laughed and clapped.

And then on the stage again appeared Zhanna the Singer and we – her band. 
Skully had sat the tempo, we started and I felt that the guitar strings under my fingers were loosened to the utmost.
Aksyonov loosened them during a humoreska or maybe Hopack to have a hearty laugh.
Some joker thick-cheeked.
Okay, Chuba and the Skully kept making up for chords and rhythm and I, like scenery alive, struck the strings without pressing them to the frets – as if I was playing a klepka...

At the end of the concert, Muraskovsky as always burst out his main ‘bomb' – the humoreska about the Acceptee and his Mother-in-Law. 

(...in those days the word ‘mother-in-law', aka 'teshcha', was the most magical incantation of stand-up comedians. 
It was enough for a man on the stage to say ‘teshcha!’ and the audience laughed and laughed.
Nowadays the population has become much more sophisticated, spoiled with cultivated humor; now an actor in the comic genre must breathe in deeply and scream into the microphone at the top of their lungs ‘asshole!!!' for the audience to get it – that's time to laugh. 

Okay, we're going back to the concert in a village club in the early seventies…) 

Murashkovsky rushes with screams from the back door through the entire small hall of the club to its stage.
He drags along the case of button-accordion in his hands, like,  that's his suitcase with personal belongings. 
On climbing the stage he starts the first-person humoreska about Acceptee’s life full of bitter pain.
His wife together with her Mom, aka teshcha, submitted him to the militia to keep at the Sobering Station and save from going on a binge.
As they were keeping him there for fifteen days he prepared his plan for revenge.

Returning from his fifteen-day confinement to the place of residence he casually breaks the news that the barrel with pickled cucumbers in the earth cellar-pit has gone to pieces… 

(The audience enlivens and starts to giggle.) 

The worried wife and teshcha race down the ladder in the cellar-pit and Acceptee from above the ladder top proclaims the biblical principle of ‘eye for an eye' and announces his verdict to them—fifteen days of incarceration—before slamming the cellar-pit lid. 

(The hall drowns in the jubilant glee.)

Every other day Acceptee drops packages with certain food items on a string to the captives, as an addition to the vegetable stored down there.

(Decibels of the thundering laughter reach the neighboring village.
The spectators with a particularly vivid imagination cannot laugh anymore – they just jerk their heads up with their mouths convulsively open, their eyes squeezed and dripping tears which they have nothing to wipe with because of their hands balled into fists are knocking on the back of the seat in the previous row.) 

Four days later, the militia called by someone of the villagers set the captives free and Acceptee gets another fifteen days of confinement. 

(‘Boo-ha-ha' in the audience begins to look like a collective fit.) 

Murashkovsky throws to them the final lines, like a bullfighter finishing the bull off.
‘Okay, I’m leaving.
You’ll never find another one like me.
And I won’t burn up your hutta, even though I could do that!’

Normally, at these words, the audience reacted with a farewell burst of laughter capable of blowing the doors and windows out together with their frames. 
Murashkovsky prepares for a bow to the general ovation and…
Silence.
Not a sound.
All froze like exhibits at the Madam Tussauds Theater of Wax Figures.
Only from somewhere in the seventeenth row comes a tiny plop of a tear giggled out just a moment before...

Then the seat backs begin to creak.
The chairman of the Village Council cautiously steps up onto the stage with a crumpled word of gratitude for the concert.
The audience cowedly disperse.
Behind the scenes Aksyonov and Skully pinion Murashkovsky in a heavy fit of hysterics.
No one knows how to appease him.

The instruments and costumes were in a record time stuffed into the bus.
All got seated in the Club Manager office for the traditional gratitude treat: bread, lard, cucumbers, moonshine.
After the first glass the Chairman of the Village Council was awkwardly bringing apology to Murashkovsky:
‘Well, here… er… in our village three huttas were burnt in a month… they couldn’t find who...’

Director of the Plant Club, Pavel Mitrofanovich, blushing more and more in his face, kept control that the bus driver would not drink more than two glasses and after the third, we leave into the night. 

At that time the taste of moonshine still made me wince so a couple of gulps followed with bread and lard were quickly worn away. 
I watched the impenetrable night stretching behind the window glass.
The driver committed his whole soul to speed and pressed the gas pedal right to the floor.
We flew.
We shot along the soft dirt roads of the district.
The headlights snatched from the darkness the trunks and branches of roadside trees.
At times huttas of a village rushed by.
A guy and a girl standing by a hutta fence.
Seeing her home.
They looked back at the passing bus.
They thought ‘the folks manage to enjoy their lives, they in the city live’.
They envied me.

Strange as it was, but I envied them.
Seeing her home.
I also wanted that.
In the warmly dark Ukrainian night...
But I had Olga.
In the back-alley where she lived, it was the same night.
But I still envied that guy.
Strange.

Olga was good at kissing and liked it, not for nothing she had such sensual lips.
The bitter taste of burnt tobacco on her breath did not distract me too much.
And then, at the next seeing her home (to the hutta’s gate) she shared a cigarette with me.
I tried it with misgivings, but all went off without the side effects and I started to smoke. 

The hutta which I escorted her to was her aunt’s home.
Olga came to stay with her that summer.
She herself was from Theodosia in the Crimea where she had her mother and elder sister.
Her father died when she was twelve years old.
An accident with a tractor. 
She loved him so much that sometimes she went to the cemetery at the dead of night to cry by the low monument of rebars with the tablet on it ‘Abram Kosmenko’.
Some name, ain’t it? But he wasn’t a jew just so was his name.
Her mother found a stepfather for her and her sister, without registering at the ZAGS though. 
A musician, knocking on drums.

Once Olga lay on the couch with the temperature watching TV.
He got seated at her feet and covered his lap with the corner of her blanket.
Her mother saw it and raise a hell with her screams.
Then she went in for athletics.
Sprinting one hundred.
The coach said she had a good physique for that sport. 
They were taken to Simferopol for competitions.
Before the dash the coach made everybody eat a whole lemon. Without sprinkling it with sugar.
He said:
'Gets straight into the blood!'

So, between the kisses, we were getting known each other more and more. 

After that concert Skully, Vladya and I went to the Seim River for an overnight stay.
Skully and I brought with us a large vinyl bag by the evening local train.
Father had fetched it from the RepBase.
Such bags were used for wrapping some helicopter spare parts.
A big translucent bag would do for a three-man tent.
We also brought a guitar and then Vladya arrived on his scooter ‘Riga-4’ and brought the
dinner.
We put the bag-tent on a sandy spit overgrown with the willow thicket not far from the railway bridge.

It was getting dark and we built a fire.
We had a bottle of wine for which Vladya brought lots of grub, too much, actually, and we scattered more than ate.
No one cared, in the morning Vladya had to ride to Konotop for more.

Vladya began to play the guitar breaks from different rock’n’roll hits.
Above the placid water, the guitar sounds great, so clear, so full and… nyshtyak, in a word, it sounds there. 
One fisherman in his boat anchored in the middle of the river liked it and asked to cut more.
But when we started ‘Shyzgara!’ another night catcher from afar – near the other bank – began to curse us for scaring off his fish.
Skully advised not to mess around with him, the man could go and call more mujiks from the huts.
The fire burnt out and we crawled under the vinyl roof...

At dawn, I woke up from water dripping into my face. 
Vinyl is absolutely water- and air-proof.
Our breathing settled on the chilled with the August night vinyl and turned into water droplets – the condensate.
They did not teach us at school about such things.
So we met the morning cold and hungry.
I hardly could persuade Vladya to entrust me with his ‘Riga-4’ to drive instead of him after some food from the city.

Yes, motors are the real thing. You don’t have to pedal or pull anything, the only effort is twisting the throttle handle and steering.

I drove into the city mapping the routes in my mind: first – home, then to the Skully’s hutta, after that to the Vladya’s and back to the Seim river.

‘Plans on paper looked just fine
Yet they’d forgotten the ravine...’

Entering the left turn between the Station and the Loony Park I heard my name.
Over the Station square, Olga was dashing in her red mini-skirt. 
The coach was right – that's some physique!
I throttled down and let the scooter come to a stop...

She ran up with no panting to speak of and let me have it: it's three days that I'd disappeared no one knew where if I did not want going out with her I didn't have to she didn't care because yesterday she got a telegram from her mother inviting to a telephone talk with Theodosia and she said that's enough for staying with her aunt she had to go back in two days but I didn't care I rushed to the Seim with my friends who were more dear to me fuck such friends and she was just a fool to think she had found someone she could trust and if she was dear to me I had to stay with her now. 

After the cold condensate shower so heated a raging, and the threat of parting, and a hope – what if she let have it off for a farewell? – had their job done.
I only begged for a couple of hours – to take the scooter to Vladya’s hutta and go to change before our meeting in the Park…

That's the way they become a doormat. 
That’s how they betray their friends.
No doubt, my friends came from the Seim by the five-hour train after they combed the entire sand spit in search of scraps that they had so thoughtlessly scattered hither and thither at the orgy the night before. 
Who but I could understand them better?
Once I myself almost fainted from hunger on the Seim.
They did not want to even talk to me boycotting for three days.
And who but I could understand them better?
You couldn't boycott a guy for longer than three days if you played dances with him and your only means of communication was through Chuba. 

(...it's mean to betray your friends… 
Yet from all the mean deeds in my life that one, for some reason, I regret the least. 
Although, of course, I am sorry. 
‘A skirt chaser, a doormat, he betrayed his homeboys for a piece of the smelly hole, betrayed for a ho!’ would say 95% of real guys.
Well, okay, it was overdone – 93% the exact number.
And I would understand them.
And I agree with them.
But most of all I’d pity them.
Too bad luck, they had not come across a woman for whose sake it’d be worth betraying...)

Now, Olga. 
Of course, her breasts in size were much inferior to those of Natalie. 
And they were not sticking out as it’s prescribed to the breasts of virgins in literary traditions.
But when I, having unbuttoned her blouse and my shirt, for the first time pressed them against my chest, I was amazed at the immensity of the sensation from the female flesh.
She did not have a bra on at that moment after dropping for a minute in the dark yard of her hutta.

The fact of her breasts smallness and the nipples not being too hard she explained by diving from a cliff after rapans. 
The depth turned out to be too great and then in the hospital they had to pierce her breasts.

(..some whopper for my sucker ears?
I have no idea.
With my excessive dupability, I believe anything they tell me. 
Yes, I mean it, while listening I believe anything from anyone.
And because of my no less fundamental thought retardation, the logical evaluation of the heard comes to me the next day or later. 
But at that time I did not care for no logic – be it rapans or other fish.
It’s only now I’m curious at times – what kind of crap could be them those rapans?
But then I’m lazy to check it with the Google…)

But the unconditionally captivating thing about her was her legs. 

(..the sexual revolution was then at its culmination all over the world, and the laws of revolutionary times have no mercy and even more so the laws of revolutionary fashion. 

In modern democratic times, you can wear whatever you want – be it maxi or midi or unisex. 
You can even spend all of your life in sportswear if only, sure thing, there are Adidas strips on it.

The sexual revolution established the dictatorship of mini.
So, if you considered yourself a woman you had to bare your knees.
Law is the law.
If you hadn’t counted yourself out of the fair sex your skirt or dress should end at least three centimeters above your knees.
The law is harsh, but it is just or – go and join the pensioner oldies on the bench in the yard...) 

Olga’s mini was twenty centimeters above her knees.
Therefore, getting seated she chastely dropped her hand between her sportingly ripe thighs so as not to flash her panties.

And on that shining sunny day standing by the tunnel of the Under-Overpass and watching her skipping down the stairs from the Plant Park in a nimble athletic style with that sports haircut and in that red miniskirt of hers I realized that I was born in the epoch really worth to be born into. 
A flick of the wind tossed her mini up and she, on the run, sat it back with the classic gesture of Marilyn Monroe from another era.

(...at such moments all the rapans in the world and hungry bros chewing the dry scraps of bread sprinkled with riverside sand can go to hell for all I care!

‘...two legs… sad, and cold, and weary
 I still remember them...’

Or, as another, the more pragmatic elect of the muses, cared to put it:
‘Olga, for your legs, I'd give anything except for the payday and the day off!'…) 

He was her co-worker at the Rags where she got a job because she didn’t go to her mother in Theodosia but stayed in Konotop by her aunt.
The Rags was how they called Recycling Factory in Konotop.
It on the very edge of the city – the first stop of the local train going to the Seim. 
Why so far?
Because they’re not too scrupulous about the labor legislation at Rags and Olga then was barely fifteen.

On the first of September, I came to the Konotop Railway Transportation Technical School together with my brother and sister who entered there after the eighth grade. 
The students were grouped and lined-up in the courtyard and the Technical School Director started to push his speech.
I felt like a zek who after serving his ten-year stretch had got three more years for nothing.

When the lining-up came to the end I went to the Personnel Department of the Technical School, took my papers back and went to enter the KaPeVeRrZe Plant.
I was given a job at the same shop floor where Vladya was already an apprentice of a locksmith – in the Experimental Section of Metal Constructions by the Repair Shop Floor.

Like most other shops in the KaPeVeRrZe Plant, the Mechanical Shop Floor was built of refractory-like brick.
It had straight even walls without any ante-revolutionary brick lace-work. 
The spacious building was one hundred and thirty meters in length, eight in height and thirty meters wide.
High above, under the roof, there rambled a cross-beam with the crane-operator cab along the rails put by the wall up there. 
The huge hook on the thick steel cable hung from the telpher running along the beam with the cab at the right end to which the crane operator climbed up the ladder fixed in the Shop Floor wall. 
Three wings of lesser height were attached to the building of the Mechanical Shop Floor.
The first wing from the entrance was the separate Tools Shop Floor and the remaining two were parts of the Mechanical Shop Floor only smaller and with no cross-beams.

The central aisle in the Mechanical Shop Floor was wide enough for two autokars to go side by side.
 An autokar was a self-propelled cart on small but sturdy wheels with no tires.
It had a small pad in front for a driver to stand on.
Between the driver and the cargo platform, there was an upright narrow metal box with two parallel levers protruding ahead from its sides so that the driver could hold onto them. 
But it only seemed so, in fact, the driver steered the autokar with those levers taking left or right turns. 
Autokar, actually, was a kind of a pullme-pushyu.
It needed no U-turns after getting loaded or unloaded in some nooky place.
The driver themselves turned on their pad and drove back.
Some clever invention.

The floor in the Shop Floor was concrete but with all engine oil splashes and autokar wheel prints, it ages ago became black as an asphalt. 

The central aisle about thirty meters before the end wall was crossed by the road from one of the wings to another and fenced with the upright iron pipes on the opposite roadside.
That was the border – the grounds of the Repair Shop Floor began behind the pipes.
The border, of course, was transparent with three duty-free entries – two along the walls and one in the center.

Past the left border-crossing, under the iron stairway, there was a wooden door in the wall opening to the workmen locker room. 
Next, after the door, a wooden desk stood abutting the wall, with one-plank benches on each side of it and a couple of cardboard file-folders, plump and smeared, on its top – the Foremen's nest. 
It was followed by a spacious workbench under the tall windows in the wall.
The row of huge vises (eight all in all) ran to the far end of the workbench.
The first in the row was Yasha's vise, then – Mykola-the-old's, further – Peter's, still further – Mykola-the-young's and so on to the gate in the same wall with the railway track entering the Shop Floor under the transverse end wall. 
