
The front of the workbench was lined with sheet iron and sheet iron doors with neat small padlocks under each of the vises opened the tool compartments.
The first was Yasha’s compartment, then Mykola-the-old’s and, well, so on...

On the second floor, above the locker room, there was the office of the Repair Shop Floor Management.
That’s where led the iron stairway of two flights with handrails and the landing in front of the office door.
And from the same landing, the narrow wall-fixed ladder went up to the cab of the cross-beam for the crane operator to get there in the morning or after the midday break and rumble away to the Mechanical Shop Floor. 

The railway track at the far end of the Repair Shop Floor was a dead end.
The bulky things in need of repair were pushed in there heaped on railway platforms while those of smaller size were brought by autokars.

At a two-meter distance from the track and parallel to it stretched the end wall. 
It also had huge tall windows latticed with iron bindings to hold the panes of dusty glass.
In the wall center above the windows, there was a large round clock under the roof like those at the railway stations. 
The electrical clock kept slumbering until the sudden ‘tick!’ when the half-meter hand jumped for two minutes at once to fall asleep again until the following ‘tick!’.

The third wall had the same tall windows.
Next to the border-crossing from the Mechanical Shop Floor there stood a drilling machine for anyone to use. 
Then came the huge table of the marker and in the corner after the tracks dead end the lathe with its turner.

Along the central axis of the Repair Shop Floor, there was another long workbench or rather two of them put abutting each other face-to-face, with an iron mesh partition in between. 
Safety rules: if a hammer flew out of hand then the mesh would not let it knock out a workman at the opposite workbench.

Walking the Shop Floor you needed to look before you stepped: giant worm gears, oil-smeared casings, and other whatnots scattered the floor indiscriminately. 
The things that had been brought by an autokar and dropped at vacant spots a couple of months before still waited to get the due attention – there always popped up something else, more pressing for urgent repair. 
But that was not our concern.
We were the Experimental Section by the Repair Shop Floor sited at the workbench next to the Foremen's nest.
We did not meddle with repair, our task was the implementation of the projects experimentally drawn at the Design Bureau by the Plant Management into the real-life metal.

A four-wheeled pull-cart, for example, or a stand ‘Glory to Labor!’ in front of the Main Check-Entrance to the Plant.
Or all kinds of bearing constructions made of channels: brackets, pillars, roof trusses.
But for so bulky products there was no room at the Shop Floor, we assembled them outside the gate on the stillage between the welder's booth and the window of the locker room. 

By the way, the parts of the city TV tower were also constructed on that stillage and the team from our Experimental Section assembled the whole tower at its site.
But that was before me...

I became a locksmith apprentice under the tutorship of Peter Khomenko with the apprenticeship stretch of three months.
For him, it was a good news because a locksmith got a certain increase in salary for the training of a newbie. 
On the other hand, he was not sure what to do with me, after he handed me a spare key from the tool compartment in the workbench under his vise so that I could keep there my hammer, chisel, and file received at the Tool Shop Floor. 
Okay, he showed me how to produce a scratcher out of thin steel wire to draw marks on an iron sheet but what then? 

In our row of vises, you could barely see a workman at work. 
Unless at the end of the working day when someone was hammering some ‘shabashka’ for household needs at his hutta.
Yet all the workforce were always busy.
A couple of locksmiths working with the welder at the stillage.
Some went to dismantle the roller table in the foundry.
Another group was led by the Senior Foreman to the Boiler Shop Floor to conduct installing of anchor bolts for a projected stationary telpher crane. 
In general, the work was running high.
Somewhere...

The Repair Shop Floor Managers worked in the office above the locker room.
It is true, the Shop Floor CEO, Lebedev, came there no more than two times a day.
Where he worked after leaving the office I had no idea.
He was wearing the railwayman black uniform overcoat.
In summer, of course, it was a jacket but still of the same uniform with silver-colored buttons.
At walking, his back was held so upright that it was not hard to guess: the man got well befogged.
And even if his front side could betray the fact of Lebedev’s being drunk as a fiddler, he never stumbled the slightest bit.
No, never.
The workers respected him, probably, because of he never stayed in the office for long.

Next, in the table of ranks were coming the Managers of the Sections by the Repair Shop Floor.
The Manager of the Repair Section – Mozgovoy. 
His thin falsetto somehow did not fit his plumpness, but he was also respected for being harmless. 
Once in the Repair Section, they were restoring the concavity profile of some bulky incomprehensible thing. 
No matter who you asked what the crap was that thing the answer was the same:
‘Who the fuck knows what hooey it is.’
With that ‘hooey’ pronounced long almost like a howl:
‘...hooooey it is.’

And so, for half a month, they kept scraping that concavity in turns.
Whoever got tired of doing nothing took the hand scraper and commenced to scrape. 
They brought it to a mirror shine so that another hooey (a convex one) began to freely enter and rotate back and forth inside the scrape one.
Mozgovoy, sure thing, was delighted by such a labor achievement at his Section.

Well, now, the locksmith Lekha from the Podlipnoye village, after his recent demobilization from the army, at the end of a working day put a chisel to the shiny surface of the polished hooey and with the hammer raised to his shoulder asked:
‘Well, so, Mozgovoy, d’you wanna me fuck the fucker?’
And Mozgovoy replied in a tired falsetto:
‘If you have no brains, go – fuck it.’
Lekha certainly was joking but Mozgovoy did not tell on him although he could...

Then the Manager of the Experimental Section, Lyonya… 
(...well, embarrassingly I cannot recollect his last name; I remember the mole on his upper lip but not the last name...)
About him, it was not clear yet: to respect or not to respect. 
He was still wet behind his ears and until recently had been sitting in the Foremen's nest by the locker room door.
Then he graduated something in absentia and got raised up to the Management Office.

Then came Engineer-Technologist, at the desk with his back to the window, but I don’t even remember his name.
And the Senior Foreman, Melai – Anatoly’s father.
He had a wide horizontal gash of a mouth and he was always silent, unlike his singsong son... 

Twice a month a cashier with a tarpaulin bag climbed up the stairway to the Management Office to mete out the advance or the monthly payment.
The very first time she gave me an advance of just twenty rubles.

When I had brought my first earnings home, then, before the arrival of Mother, I scattered all the twenty paper rubles on the couch in the kitchen – one by one, so that it would seem more. 
I said:
‘Mom, that’s for you to dispose of.’
And then I asked two rubles for cigarettes, without going into detail...

The working day began at eight in the morning.
We passed along the aisle of the still silent Mechanical Shop Floor to our locker room where along the three blind walls there stood tall plywood boxes of lockers and two more rows of them (back to back) divided the locker room into halves along the longitudinal axis. 
Each locker had two vertical compartments: one for the clean clothes and the other for the working dress, aka spetzovka, given to a worker once a year. 
From above, the two compartments were covered with a mutual shelf for a hat and the package with a midday meal.
But for a midday meal, I and Vladya went home during the break – over a stile in the concrete wall and in five minutes you're home. 

While we changed clothes and had a smoke in the locker room, the machines of the Mechanical Shop Floor started to turn on, one after another.
The howling, rapping, and rumbling of their engines merged with the squeal of the steel being scraped off.
The door slightly muffled the working day cacophony but then it got swung open and the Foreman, Borya Sakoon, drove us out to work, that was to the vises or to the stillage in the yard where we seemed to be as if busy with work.

The rest of the day Borya Sakoon spent sitting by the locker room door on a bench at the desk of Foremen's. 
He leaned on it with one elbow, then with the other and constantly smoked cigarettes ‘Prima'. 
Short, with thin hair and colorlessness in the face, he was simply a namesake of Vladya because both denied any kinship. 
Often fits of coughing made him pull his cap over his face and cough through it into the palm of his hand.
If that did not subdue the fit, he threw the cap onto the desk and went on coughing with his face dropped into it.
Then he with a jerk took another cigarette out from his pocket, lit it up and the cough eventually died down until the next attack.
Sometimes he rose from the desk to stretch his whole body – so small against the backdrop of the mad rambling of machines in the Mechanical Shop Floor, then he lit another cigarette and sat down again.

One time he beckoned me with a finger to sit on the opposite bench at the desk and shouting over the roaring howl of the machine tools began to tell how soon after the war he went to dances in the club of Podlipnoye and the village yobos started to bully him and he ran out of the club but they were chasing and he had to lie down in a ditch and shoot his Walter pistol from there and he also witnessed how the law enforcing bodies did away with the All-Union thief-in-law, handled Kushch, who came to Konotop but they were following him and in the Budyonny street just neared from behind and banged into the back of his head and in a second a ‘black raven' drove up and he, the young guy Borya at that time, was told to grab Kushch by the legs and help to heave the body into vehicle. 
‘And even now you can't buy anywhere a fabric like that in the Kushch's suit,' he shouted taking with his fingers a tobacco fiber from a cigarette ‘Prima' stuck to his lips. 

But Borya Sakoon did not always look so miserable and rotten.
One day Vladya called me to drop into the Loony to watch how our Foreman was dealing with the Ballet Group there.
In the hall on the second floor, a dozen girls held the handrail along the mirror wall and Borya walked along their line like a cock of karra in a short, diamond-shaped necktie. 
And demonstrating some move he shot his leg almost above his head.

The hardest time of the whole working day was the concluding half an hour. 
In those half an hour there was no time at all: it just stopped.
It’s better not to even look at that round electric clock above the window lattice in the transverse wall.
Some endless stretch of disappointment.
And you had an itch to push the frozen clock hand with a straw.

(...I have no idea why with a straw, but that's what I wanted at that time when there was no time, although I understood that the straw itself would break up instead of moving that iron piece of crap...) 

The machine tools in the Mechanical Shop Floor slowly fell silent, one after another. 
The locksmiths of the Experimental Section lined the workbench leaning their backs on their vises.
The two-meter-tall Mykola-the-old emptied his horse-long nose into a lump of a rag the color of earth-and-ash. 
Who could imagine he had a handkerchief!
Mykola-the-young pensively picked at fresh acne on his cheeks.
Tick!
Twenty-seven to five.

Swarthy-faced Yasha began to tell how the Red Army took him along after liberating Konotop from the Germans. 
A solitary ‘shabashka'-tinker at the grinding wheel in the corner did not interfere with the calm flow of Yasha's story. 
They ran to attack and ours supported them from behind shooting the ‘forty-fivers', and one of the supporting shells shot off the balls of one attacker. 
Yasha’s palm showed the trajectory of a flying 45-mm shell.
So he ran half a kilometer more before he died.

And, recollecting how I also felt nothing and only the ground jumped before my eyes as we ran to attack in Zarnitsa military game through the shaggy mist over the bumpy field, I believed Yasha.

He shifted the cap to the back of his head revealing the sharp, like an arrowhead, angle from which his black hair ran back under his cap.
Not a speckle of gray.
He looked twice as young as Borya Sakoon.
The foreman told that at the installation of the TV tower something went wrong with the uppermost section.
It was in winter with severe frost and Yasha took off his sheepskin coat, and climbed up by the cable and put it to rights. 

Mykola-the-old was two heads taller than Yasha.
They were sort of buddies and after work went home by the same diesel train, only to different stops.
Tick!
Seven to five.
Okay, that's that; time to go to change.

Skully also dropped out of the Railway Transportation Technical School and entered our Experimental Section. 
And that’s right. 
He got no scholarship there but after giving him a diploma they would send him to work no one knew where.
Who needed that?
So the three of the Orpheuses got together.
And Chuba worked in the Car Repair Shop Floor.
We sometimes ran into each other in the Plant.

And we continued to play dances even when Vladya smashed his finger with a hammer.
The Club paid each of us thirty-six rubles a month.
It seemed too little, but what could we do? 
When we started a talk with Pavel Mitrofanivich, he said they bought an electric guitar for one hundred and fifty rubles and as a result, he had no funds to increase our salary. 
The guitar, named ‘Iolanta', was certainly classy – so neat, and red and sounding miles better than those made by ‘The Radio' magazine leads. 

Soon the Club Director sent me along with the projectionist Konstantin Borisovich to the city of Chernigov to bring two more electric guitars from the local Music Factory: the bass and the rhythm ones.
Pavel Mitrofanovich talked to the Plant Management and I was exempted from work for two days, because of the long way to Chernigov.
There we stayed in a hotel overnight as business travelers and in the morning we arrived at the factory. 
Konstantin Borisovich went to talk with their Management and I had to wait for two hours.
Then they brought the guitars for me to check them – they hadn’t even had cases.
And they were much heavier than ‘Iolanta’, and covered with black lacquer.
It was clear that the factory hadn’t mastered yet the electric guitar production.
Though, when we brought them to Konotop, Chuba said that the bass guitar would do.

On the following Monday in the Shop Floor locker room, Vladya started agitating me and Skully to get an exemption from work for health reasons. 
He suggested going to the Plant Medical Center to complain about the sausage we ate the day before when playing at a wedding.
That sausage was certainly not fresh.
Only we had to go all together and say the same thing.

We found Chuba on the Car Repair Shop Floor and the four of us came to the First Aid facilities with the same complaint of the wedding sausage.
There they seated us on chairs along the wall and the nurse brought four tin bath basins with ears and put them on the floor in front of us – one for each of the ill Orpheuses.
She then brought a bucket of luke-warm water tinted with potassium permanganate. 
The doctor told us to drink it in liters and then poke two fingers in the mouth as deep as the root of the tongue – that would save us from the food poisoning.
The preparations for the stomach pumping worked on Chuba and Skully like a charm, their poisoning crises passed at once and they returned to their respective workplaces. 
But Vladya and I staunchly stayed until the end of the procedure and threw up everything into the basins that we had for breakfast that morning.
The doctor was impressed by our obstinacy and gave us exemption until the end of the current working day.
When we had changed and reached the Check-Entrance the midday beak began.
It turned out that for all our labors we got just four hours of freedom having to come back to the mill next morning again. 

The Club Director, Pavel Mitrofanovich, announced to us that the Club was buying the electric organ ‘Yonika’ and that Lyokha Kuzko would play it as the fifth Orpheus.

Lyokha had reddish and already thinning hair and sported a horseshoe-shaped mustache a-la the Pesnyary to compensate a severe fold in his nose after some old-times fight. 
Because of that disfigured nose, he had been handled Rhinoceros. 
He was seven years older than us but he was a real guy.
He invited me and Vladya to his home to listen to the Beatles White Album copied to the tape-recorder. 
His father, Anatoly Efimovich Kuzko, had the yard of his fatherly hutta a two-story red brick house built for Rhinoceros.
On the first floor, there was a garage with a gate of sheet iron and two rooms and a kitchen on the second floor. 
Some folks could live, anyway.
But his Dad did not buy Lyokha a car because he was drinking like a fish. 
That’s why his wife Tatyana had left him taking their baby daughter away.

Along with the Beatles' White Album Lyokha also shared ‘The Forensic Medicine Textbook' to look through. 
The yellowish pages contained lots of black and white photographs with explanatory text under them. 
But then Lyokha opened his favorite spot in the textbook at the page with dozens of small sized pictures (as for a passport) rows of them demonstrating the difference between intact and damaged hymens.

(...perhaps because of that textbook the pornographic publications make me recoil. 
I really feel scared – what if now, turning a page in ‘The Playboy' I’ll run into the murder with the use of household scissors sticking up into my face or else a guy strangled on a wooden stool, who knows?.) 

For the midday meal, we went home over the concrete wall – a real shortcut for no less than half a kilometer compared with going through the Plant Check-Entrance. 
Having warm up the soup or vermicelli on the kerogas in the veranda, I took the meal to the kitchen and there took off my spetzovka pants and jacket remaining in the underpants and the tank top. 
It made no difference because I was home alone with the parents at work and the younger ones at their Technical School.
The reason for taking off my working clothes was those ten minutes before going back to the Plant.
Sitting in dirty spetzovka on the couch or in the armchair was not right.

In those ten minutes, I played the guitar and screamed different song for developing my vocal skills which I did not and do not have. 
But I sang all the same – may Beata Tyszkiievich, a professional Polish beauty from a color magazine pinned above the couch together with the black and white photo of the group ‘The Who' forgive me. 
Once my roaring resulted in a boner and I, grabbing a ruler left behind by the Technical School students on the desk under the window, measured my dick. 

The locksmithery inoculates respect for the detailed knowledge...

One day, returning from the midday break we, Vladya and I, saw Skully sitting in the nest of Foremen's nest next to Borya Sakoon and an unfamiliar man in clean clothes.
‘Here they’re coming’ said the foreman and the stranger invited us and Skully as well to go along with him.
We followed his athletic figure in a tartan shirt.
It was a hot October day and we three wore just T-shirts with no spetzovka jackets on
From the farewell grimace of Borya Sakoon, we guessed that we were led by a representative of law-enforcing bodies, but had no idea why. 

From the Main Check-Entrance, the latecomers were walking from the canteen in the square beyond the gate. 
Everything went as usual and only we were pulled out from the routine life of the Plant and separated from it.
‘Where to, smarties?’ asked Peter Khomenko with a smile from the counter-directed stream of the workmen, but noticing the man in clean ahead of us who turned back with a jerk, Peter dropped all his cheerfulness at once and paced away towards the Shop Floor without waiting for an answer.
‘Who’s that?’ alertly asked the escort.
I replied that was my tutor and we left the Plant through the Main Check-Entrance. 

He told us to get into the ‘Volga’ where Chuba could be already seen through the glass of the windshield and the car drove to the Militia City Department, which was next to the Passport Bureau.
Behind the gate of the Militia City Department, there was a wide yard-coral bordered with one-story buildings of barrack type. 
We were separated and led to different offices in the different buildings where they began to ask us questions and write down our responses. 

Of course, not everything in the proceeding had been recorded.
For instance, the interrogation of Skully began as follows:
‘Do you know that fucking moron?' 
‘Which fucking moron?’
‘The one who brought you here.’
‘No, I don’t know him.’
‘This is the Head of the Criminal Investigation Department.’
‘No, I do not know him.’

And I was interrogated by that… well, Head of the Criminal Investigation Department.
Seated at the large desk, muscular, with the hair sticking closely to his skull he asked who the day before was present at the rehearsal in the Variety Ensemble room in the Club.
And who was the last to leave? 
Who was approaching the closet where so expensive German Accordion with four registers was kept?
He kept writing all the time and when the phone on his desk rang, he pressed the receiver to his ear with the shoulder, like Marlon Brando in the movie where he was the sheriff.
After interrogating all of us they said we were free and could return to our workplace.

We sauntered up along the street to the Department Store and turned left to the Peace Square. 
Four Orpheuses in smeared spetzovka pants and old faded T-shirts.
Along the Peace Avenue, we also strolled not hurrying – the working day was ending at five. 
At the Zelenchuk area, we had a bit of fun jumping at each other like Mazandaran tigers and tearing down the worn T-shirts on our bodies. 
We did not stop it until all the four T-shirts were torn apart from their collars to the waist. 
So what?
The day was sunny and pretty warm.
Then we tied the tatters with knots upon our navels and went, like hippies, on.
And it was Skully who had started the horseplay.
Probably, because of he had such a hairy chest. 

Next week, on my way to the Plant after the midday break I, as always, called into Vladya's hutta. 
One of his neighbor’s hens had died in the yard that day and Vladya suggested taking her with us to hang in our locker room.
Just for fun.
The plan did not inspire me too much but I still helped Vladya to smuggle the demised to the Plant.
For mounting the wall along the Professions Street you needed your hands and if dragging a newspaper parcel with a hen you had nothing to grab hold of those holes in the concrete slabs with.

In the center of the locker room ceiling there hung a length of wire for the light bulb which was missing together with its cartridge. 
Vladya took someone’s unfinished ‘shabashka’ from under the window, rested it on the middle row of the lockers, climbed on top and wrapped the unemployed wire around the hen’s neck.
She froze up there with her dirty white wings loosely spread over the bony dead legs.

The midday break was over and the machine tools in the Mechanical Shop Floor started their scraping wails when the black-haired fatty locksmith from the Repair Section entered the room. 
Seeing the lifeless bird he did not laugh but left immediately.
In a second our foreman, Borya Sakoon, flew in. 
With his eyebrows shot up and the moth in the form of the small letter ‘o’ he stood a moment or two considering the listless animal from his uplifted face.
Then he turned to us:
‘Hairy-yobbos! Bitches! You did it!’
For some reason, he was in the habit of calling us ‘hairy-yobbos'. 
We certainly denied the allegation but Vladya took the dead bird off, wrapped back into the same newspaper and dropped it somewhere outside of the Shop Floor. 

In the final analysis, Borya was right – with just two eyewitnesses by the end of the working day the entire Repair Shop Floor knew that the hairy-yobbos (the working mass slavishly aped the foreman's example in calling us that name) fixed a chicken in the locker room. 
And if the thing remained there for at least half an hour that would inevitably give the start for indistinct rumors circulating in Konotop that at the KaPeVeRrZe Plant they had hanged someone in the locker room... 

Olga and I ceased dating at the gate of her aunt’s hutta.
We found a more suitable place, or, rather, she showed it to me.
A little further along the Budyonny Street, there was a short dead end to the left coming to the closed iron gate of the Oil Storage Base. 
Near the gate, along with the roadside fence there stood a park bench. 
Who and when had dragged it there I couldn’t say but it occupied a strategically right place remaining in the shadow not penetrated with the light from the lamp above the gate.

There I got acquainted in absentia with Olga’s Konotop relatives.
The sister of her mother, Nina, immediately after the war served as a telephone operator at the headquarters of some Soviet Army division stationed in Poland.
After she was demobilized she didn’t return to the Soviet Union because she had married a Pole and they had got a child already, so Nina stayed to live among the Poles.
Four years later she arrived in Konotop to attend the funeral of one of her parents.
That was a mistake.
They never let her go back despite the fact that her young daughter remained in Poland and the country itself was a member of the Socialist Camp Community.
She never knew what happened in the life of her daughter or husband because none of her letters was replied. 

Fifteen years later Aunt Nina registered her marriage with Uncle Kolya who did not drink and had a good job in the forestry only he often needed to go somewhere by his motorcycle with a stroller. 
But he had built a really good hutta of three rooms and a kitchen.
They had no children and adopted a girl.
She was being very fond of and named Olya.
Recently they bought a piano for her although it’s probably too late to start at eleven.

Aunt Nina worked at the Meat-Packing Plant in three shifts.
To reach her workplace she had to walk two kilometers along the railway tracks.
On the other hand, they do not have to buy meat at the Bazaar. 
At the Meat-Packing Plant, they checked the bags of the workers going out through the Check-Entrance after their shift but they did not look into the women panties. 

And on that same bench, we talked about Art. 
For example, we discussed there the film ‘Romeo and Juliet’ after a joint watching it in the basement cinema of the Loony.
‘I could not make out what they were talking about but the tears dripped all the same as if I was some fool...' 

(...a very well-defined assessment, by the by, the rhymed and metered speech makes even words you know too obscure to get it that a lot of noble ladies in Verona, younger than you, had babies at your age…) 
