
And it was there (I’m still on the bench) that Olga really harpooned me up securely and for long.
She uttered just one phrase but if you’re a born patsy-graphomaniac you’re hooked alright.
‘Yesterday I entered in my diary – “when he kissed me goodbye I was immensely happy.”
Damn it! You're done for! And forever!
Firstly, in many tons of the read and re-read literature, I had never come across such an expression ‘immensely happy'. 
Secondly, she kept a diary!
Thirdly, but not lastly, I was there in that diary!!!

After the dances, we sometimes escorted her girlfriend Sveta to the porch of Sveta's hutta. 
At so late a time the Konotopers who live in huttas did not venture into their yards, more so Sveta's Granny and Grandpa. 
After giggling by our side for a stretch of a cigarette Sveta went into to bed and the porch with the narrow plank of a bench along its plank-paneled sides remained at our disposal.

On one of such evenings, Olga told me to wait on that porch while she'd be gone to her hutta because Aunt Nina was on the third shift that day and Uncle Kolya had gone by his motorcycle somewhere in the District. 

It took a long time until I heard the tinkle of the wicket handle-latch in the neighboring yard behind departing aunt Nina.
A few minutes later Olga came and silently beckoned me to follow her.
We went out into the back-alley and noiselessly entered the yard of her hutta. 

The door from the veranda led to a large kitchen with an even larger living room to the right and a bedroom to the left both separated from the kitchen with cloth curtains in their doorways.
After the living room, there was another bedroom for Olga and small Olya. 
We did not go there but turned into the owners’ bedroom to the left.

Olga switched on the feeble nightlight and went to the bedroom behind the living room.

I was left alone with the glistening nickel-plated backs of a large double bed of a ceremonial appearance and with a smaller more casual one next to the curtains of the doorway to the kitchen.
I was numb with the mute tension.

Olga returned in a dressing robe keeping its unbuttoned sides in place with her folded arms.
Not saying a word we both looked at the smaller bed and Olga put out the night light.
Under the robe, she had only panties on. 

I hastened to follow the suit and remained in just underpants.
Then followed a long silent battle for each of the sleeves of her dressing gown.
Finally, I threw the whole item on a chair by the wall, the score of the clothes we had on was reduced to a draw: ‘ 1 : 1 '. 
When I turned to her, she lay on her back covered up to her chest shielded with tightly pressed arms over it.
It was chilly indeed in the room and I got under the covers too.

The bustle about her small panties was no less than with the large dressing gown.
And there we were both naked at last.
It's really hot under those covers. 
And then…

Then she writhed furiously under me pushing my hands away.
I could only rub my dick between her thighs and against the tiny turf of hair without knowing what was what but feeling just a little more and…
Now, almost… about…
Damn, she turned off again!. 

(...I would do it, I swear I would, if not for the lack of time.
That night the cuckoo in the kitchen cuckoo clock went crazy and jumped out with her shrill ‘coo! coo!’ every other two minutes and now it was already croaking six and Olya would be getting up to get ready for school and it was time for me to dress up and go away, quick, before Aunt Nina came back…)

Of course, that night we allowed ourselves way too much.
We had gone too far and there remained no fail-safe for us.
Hugs and kisses by the hutta's wicket or on Sveta’s porch were not enough and wouldn’t do.
But where?
And when?

On the seventh of November, Olga said, after young Olya would have passed in the demonstration together with her school, Uncle Kolya would take her and Aunt Nina to his village.
And that time Olga wouldn’t wriggle away,
Cuckoo’s cries would mean nothing.
The whole night would be ours…

In the morning of November 7, I came after her, we also were going out in the festive city.
She was retouching with a pencil her trimmed thread-thin brows, marking the corners of her eyes.
Spiffing up, in short.
We were alone, but when I reached out with my arms she didn't respond with her body and said, 
‘Why? The hutta is ours today. But only… You know, there’s something...’

I froze in mortification. Could it be she's going announce she had menstruation? 

Well, in general, if I wanted it to be, well, I know what, then I had to agree to one condition… 
‘What?! Speak out!’
Now, before going out to the city she would make up my eyes.
What the fuck?!.
Though, if you think about it, that’s better than menstruation.

Hercules would understand me.
He—the winner in fights with the Nemean Lion, the Lernean Hydra, the Cretan Bull and other monsters—was made (by a chick named Omphal)  wear a woman dress and spin yarn in a gynoecium, with her high heel put on his male dignity's throat. 
At least in some way, I'd be equal to that inhumanly powerful demigod. 
And I agreed…

Blue eyeshadows were put on my eyelids, black eyeliner left a wide line along the lashes…
And out we went to the city.

(...now, after all those ‘blue' and ‘pink' revolutions, after knighting of Elton John, after the charming cutie pirate Jack Sparrow people became more intelligent. 
In those days they needed two or even three glances to guess what actually was wrong with my visage.
Then someone shrugged, another one giggled…)

Borya Sakoon, who came out of his five-story block in the Zelenchuk area cheerfully greeted me but having looked more closely suddenly changed in his face. 
Genuine fright distorted the worn out facial features of the foreman, the unfinished ‘hairy yo...’ stuck in his throat and he fled back to the block of his residence.

(...and that was the man who survived the rampant banditry and all kinds of ‘black cat’ gangs in the post-war Konotop!
Or maybe because of that?..)

‘You are sick in your head and fleeing the treatment,’ concluded my younger sister Natasha flatly when meeting us on the sidewalk of the Peace Avenue.

‘...but I don’t care
  ‘cause of my boner...’

In the Central Park Olga took out her cosmetic bag and washed out my War Paint.
Enough for pretending a Hercules.
Then the Skully’s girlfriend Nina with her girlfriend Ira came up to us and the three girls went away looking for a place to have a smoke.

A group of guys from the Settlement approached me.
They were celebrating in full swing already.
They felt elated.
They wanted that an Orpheus from the Settlement was also nyshtyak.
They tore off the lid from an intact bottle and handed it to me.
Everything in this life had to be paid for, even your popularity.
I raised the bottle up, threw back my head, cast the parting look at the sun and started drinking from the bottle's neck. 
Then the bottle went around in the circle.
Then we went to a grocery store for more wine.
Then I felt sick and went home.

I woke up in the lean-to on the iron bed which substituted for ‘Jawa’ after the Arkhipenkos moved to their apartment.
My ‘dacha' season had already passed but the bed still remained in the lean-to and chanced to be so helpful. 
I woke up with my raincoat and shoes on but the naked iron mesh of the bed didn't mind. 
The main thing was that I hadn't overslept. 
That day we were playing farewell dances in the Park.
Only I still had to trudge all the way there being so stiff and with that oily smack in my dried mouth and—ouch!—with that pain in the nape...

I finally came there when everyone was dragging already the equipment to the Dance-Floor stage.
Lyokha started to carp that I was dodging and Olga too went to attack:
‘Where did you get lost?' 
I hardly could explain that I was very sick and Lyokha said all that I needed was a good drink to get okay.

I shuddered at just the thought of it but Lyokha and Olga began to laugh. 
Yurko – the one with the appearance of a boy that Olga kept as her adjutant, ran to a nearby store and brought wine.
I forced myself to take a few gulps and—lo!—I was alive again.
It worked like a charm...

After the dances were over and the equipment dragged back to the ticket office, Olga and I left the Park and in two minutes of tense walking reached her back-alley.
One hutta, two – the one of Sveta's, the third was for us. 
I assuredly walked Olga to the wicket opened it and she, all of a sudden, recoiled… 

By age, I was two years older than Olga but, to me, it always seemed another way around. 
She knew more than I from all the stuff I had read in books.
And she had authority.
Whenever one of the girlfriend in our bohemian environment had problems with outsiders, she turned to Olga for help. 
Olga walked out with the brazen and put that stupid cow in her proper place...

It was a rare evening when the dances went off without fighting.

A multi-voiced discordant squeal rose suddenly from the Dance Floor yet absolutely not in time with the number we were playing.
In the dense mass of the youth gathered for collective recreation a circle of free space formed in no time dimmed with the rapid gusts of fists milling the air.
The vortex of the circle tornadoed fast across the Dance Floor, accompanied with shrieks of girls giving way to it.
We stopped playing and encouraged dear friends to keep order.
The defeated side, alone or in the ring of his buddies, was pushing through to the exit.
To remove the low depressing hum Skully set the tempo with dry knocks of sticks against each other and we started the next number... 

Girls did not make a show of their dissent and for their cat-fights invited each other to go out. 
Olga went out a couple of times and became an authority because in Theodosia she had started dances-going at the age of thirteen and without wasting time on empty talks finished them off in a business-like manner. 
As a result, if some frostbitten bitch hurt feelings of a girl from the bohemian circle, the mention of Olga's name made her realize her blunder and she shut up. 

And Olga also seemed older because of attentive attitude towards her from mujiks.

Once after the dances when we collected the wires and cables on the stage, a frightened guy ran into the Dance Floor, crossed it and jumped over the fence into the Park. 
At the last moment, the pursuer, a hairy ass mujik over thirty, managed to deal a glancing strike and the fugitive fell awkwardly into the bushes, but leaped up at once and ran away. 
‘I’ll catch you, bitch!’ cried the triumphant and turning to Olga standing by the stage added,
‘Ain’t it, Ruddy?’
‘You yourself is the word,’ Olga answered diplomatically and the latter left the Dance Floor with a swagger.

That’s why I felt so much younger than her.
But the moment she flinched at the wicket of the dark hutta that feeling disappeared and everything fell into place. 
Next to her fear, I felt older and stronger than her. 
I felt pity for her and compassion.
After all, the younger ones should be shielded and protected.
Even from ourselves.
I comforted the frightened girl and left without entering the yard.

On my way to the Nezhin Street I knew that I had done the righteous thing and was pleased with myself, yet all the same I couldn’t but agree with the diagnosis put by my sister Natasha – ‘sick in my head and fleeing the treatment’...

On November 7, the unusually long Indian summer ended and we moved to the Club to play dances there.
The Hall of the Ballet Studio on the second floor opposite the cinema auditorium stretched for some forty meters from the door to the small stage at the far end wall.
The stage was intended not for concerts but for Evenings of Recreation and therefore could be climbed in two steps over the couple of its all-width stairs. 
That way a recreating participant could ascend there when called by the mass-entertainer to take part in some funny competition or another event of the Evening. 

The stage took the central one-third of Hall's width and was continued on both sides with vertical gratings of smooth rebars coated with black paint. 
Light cloth curtains hung behind the gratings forming a kind of backstage.
Above the center of the Hall, midst the roof bearing structures painted with the black Kuzbass-Lacquer, a large white ball was fixed covered with mirror shards.
When the ball, got rotated with its electric motor in the beam of a searchlight, polygonal light spots were floating along the walls and the floor of the Hall.
The longitudinal walls consisted mainly of windows under which the handrail for students of the ballet art was stretching over the whole Hall.
The wall opposite the stage consisted, as it’s proper for ballet schools, of tightly fitted mirrors.
The Hall was an ideal place for any gathering – from the New Year matinees for the Settlement kids to the School Graduating Parties, the Evenings of the Plant Youth Recreation and, the last but not least, for dances.

And those dances also discovered the weak spot in the ideal – its floor.
The floor had the coat of red paint which under the soles of a couple hundred dancers turned into fine dust and peeled off in less than a month.
However, the Club Director, Pavel Mitrofanovich, said it did not matter.

Behind the curtains on both sides of the stage there stood the huge load speakers from the summer cinema in the Park and they produce such a bomb sound – nyshtyak! 
Our distant figures with guitars mirrored in the wall on the other end of Hall over the rhythmic swaying of the dancers' heads in the dimly lighted void with the swimming specks from the ball – around, and round, and round – and everything went on really nyshtyak. 

And only Chuba puffed and complained that the sound of his bass guitar from two black portable loudspeakers on the stage was completely lost behind the mighty boxes with the meter-wide speakers.
Lyokha said he knew a guy who had low-frequency speakers for bass and we only had to procure material for a box to install them.
And he also suggested the place to seek the needed material – The KaPeVeRrZe Plant.
After all, all we needed was a sheet of thick plywood three by two meters.

We, the Plant affiliated Orpheuses, started to mull over a plan.
There was no plywood on the Repair Shop Floor, where everything we dealt with was iron and steel.
The right place to look for plywood was the Car Repairing Shop Floor where Chuba worked.
And he said, yes, the plywood could be extracted from the cars brought for repair, but how to get it out from the Plant? 

He declined the proposal to cut the plywood in size of the bass box parts and drop them over the wall in the Professions Street.
His master would at once ask unnecessary questions – where from was so immodest quantity of such an expensive material? 
There remained just one option: to get the whole sheet out of the Plant through the Club building with its never closed side door to the Plant grounds, next to the bill painters room.
However, the plan had some slippery point – the Car Repair Shop Floor and the Club were located at the opposite ends of the Plant.
Dragging the whole sheet through the whole Plant?
Chuba refused to take such a risk.
Skully also was not too enthusiastic.
As always, the hardest part rested entirely on my and Vladya’s shoulders...

Well, to tell the truth, not quite entirely because Chuba still ripped off the plywood in a car and forgot to lock its door when leaving, as it was required by the rules.

Through that door, I and Vladya penetrated the car and in the indicated place found the desired treasure – a standard sheet of thirty-millimeter-thick plywood. 
It had a couple of stains but that did not matter at all.

We dragged the plywood out of the car and, grabbing from the edges, carried it along the gravel of the track ballast shoulder, then along the asphalt paths between the Shop Floors.
On our way, we kept persuading each other that the sheet was not too dreadfully heavy and that there was nothing special if two workmen carried it within the Plant between the Shop Floors. 
Although we personally had never observed such a picture.
Avtokars were a usual means of transportation for such purposes. 

When to the Club there remained the smaller leg – to pass by the Smithy Shop Floor, the All-Plant Bathhouse, the Fire Brigade building, the Oxygen Tank Filling Station and the Medical Center – Skully ran up from the Mechanical Shop Floor to inform that Borya Sakoon sent after us and if we didn’t show up we would be fired.
That was something new, Borya never threw threats to the tune like that.
Could the Criminal Investigation Department Head come back again?

We rested the sheet against the smoky wall Of the Smithy Shop Floor under the marble tablet screwed to the bricks announcing that in 1967, on the fifties anniversary of the Soviet Power there was embedded a message to the KaPeVeRrZe Plant workers who would work there in the year of centennial anniversary of the October Revolution.
Making sure that our sheet did not interfere with the traffic, we went to the Repair Shop Floor.

Borya was raging more furiously than Fantômas – where had we been paddling when the whole Experimental Section was sent to ‘harvesting’?

Yes, harvesting was not a joke.
It was like parading the entire workforce of the Experimental Section.
That was the moment when everyone was really busy.

All the locksmiths from the Experimental Section, in full collection, with a piece of paper naming the material and the needed quantity of it started for the Central Warehouse.
There, behind the All-Plant Bathhouse heaps of rebars of different diameter, by heaps of metal fittings of powerful profiles, by heaps of pipes with a section of no less than ten centimeters were piled along the tracks. 
Then a stocky railway crane would approach along the tracks and hover its beam with hanging steel cables over the tangled heaps and hills of all those piles of metal. 
Two of the most experienced workers equipped with steely breakers would noose the pipes, rebars or channels named in the paper.
The rest would share their advice standing at a safe distance.
The crane with scraping screech would pull the trapped metal out from the heap of iron messed up with the previous ‘harvestings' and lower it onto the waiting autokar. 
The Ware House employee would check the approximate amount of the cargo with the figure indicated in the order and give his ‘okay’.
The driver would return to the autokar from the safe distance and drive it to the Shop Floor scraping the asphalt of the paths with dangling ends of rebars, or pipes or whatever was there in the order.
The locksmiths of the Experimental Section would return to the Shop Floor as a monolithic cheerful crowd proud of the fulfilled duty...

And now the returning locksmiths emerged from the Mechanical Shop Floor aisle but we were not among them.
We failed to attend the holy rite of harvesting.
It was good that Vladya, having the same last name as the foreman, had a special nickname approach to the latter and we again disappeared from the Experimental Section. 

We returned to our sheet under the memorial tablet.
The Manager of the Repair Section by our Shop Floor, Mozgovoy, stood by it and, eyeing the plywood, swallowed his saliva. 
Of course, such a material would whet anyone’s appetite.
We grabbed our prey.
‘Where are you taking it?’ asked Mozgovoy in a wistful falsetto.
‘To the Plant Management,’ casually replied Vladya and we dragged the sheet in the Main Check-Entrance direction twenty meters to the right of which the Club building continued the wall surrounding the Plant.
The side door, sure thing, was not locked.

We dragged the sheet in and leaned it against the bunch of billboards opposite the painters’ room...

When after work we came to the Club to move the plywood to our room the crisp-curled House Manager, Stepan was already wheeling round and about our sheet.
The deficient material would entice anyone into improper planning even a do-nothing who in all of his life did not hold anything heavier than the bunch of keys in his hands. 

It’s not about Stepan, though, he’d been a good carpenter they said.
It’s about the Club Director who stood by and tinkled his personal bunch of keys hallooing Stepan to our trophy.
Don't rub soap to your cheeks, Pavel Mitrofanovich, no shaving for you today, as a winged Settlement saying runs... 

The winter broke out somehow at once.
The snowdrifts pile up as if they always were there...

I went after Olga before the dances.
She introduced me to everyone in the hutta.
I was urged to take my coat off and sit down and have a drink, but, no, thank you I had to work that evening it’s time for us to leave.
Olga got dressed and we left.

However, it was a bit early for the Club because we didn’t move the equipment from the stage and only locked the Hall after the dances.
With that time reserve, we paid a visit to the bench near the Oil Storage Base. 
She had a bottle of wine in her bag and we drank it.
Not too much, just to warm up and get in the mood. 
And then we went to the Club along the tight snow crust pressed to the road with the traffic tires and the pedestrians' footwear soles. 

Already at night, dark and moonless, but with bright pricks of the star specks in the sky, we returned to the unfinished bottle of red wide stacked away in an inconspicuous snow drift.
It turned out to be so cold that it did not warm at all and it tasted like ice too.
We drank but did not emptied the bottle and lit our cigarettes.

I unbuttoned my coat, she unbuttoned hers and sat down in my lap.
We already were treating each other as our personal property.
I might run my hand into her pantyhose up to the convex concavity I had not find on that too short a night. 
She could casually unfasten my trousers belt and unbutton the fly to grasp my boner.
Everything was, as usual, blended with long, like a protracted dive into another dimension, kisses. 

And suddenly something happened and I was gone. 
Out of myself… and merging with… the fusion firmer with each push… no I anymore just we… we, we, we and nothing else… unmakeoutable… doesn't matter… and all's swimming… the fog… what's that?. What?. Oh, no!. More!. 

The connection was lost.
The night slowly emerged from nowhere, the snow, the bench was back again… 
A couple of jerks after the elusive new world showed there was nothing to keep, to return, to continue with...

We broke apart.
Again she and I.
I stood up, deafened.
The same lamp from up its post. 
Sparks in the snow drifts.
The black sky.
The star specks...
When no one can think at all…
Where’s my hat?
Okay, it can wait… 
November 17…
17 years old locksmith apprentice…
lost his virginity…
And she?

(...I do not know until now.
It does not matter.
Who cares?..)

Saying goodbye to her, so novelly quiet, by the hutta of her aunt, I realized that from now on it was my duty to be stronger than she and I did not have to understand anything else, from now and forever and ever.  

(...here! Here!
I can beautifully formulate thoughts after all.
Subsequently.
Decades later...)


The next evening I went to the Evening School of the Working Youth.
Olga sometimes attended classes there because Aunt Nina pressed her to get the paper about finishing eighth grade.
I had to wait for the end of a lesson after which she left with me. 
I saw Olga to her aunt's hutta and on the way, she told me how profuse the bleeding had been. 

(...as if it’s changing anything.
What's the point in all the maidenheads, circumcisions, adulteries and faithfulness forever and a day? 
What was – will be there no more.
What is – will be lost.
What is to be – can’t be avoided…)
