
Our love affair was not, of course, able to melt the snow and ice of winter but all the winter ice and snow could not quench our flaming ardor. 
And we fanned the flame at the least opportunity.

The snow-covered bench by the Oil Storage Base was soon rejected because of its odd backrest. 
The sheet iron trailer by the tiny ice rink in the Park was more spacious but it took a long time waiting until the guys would finish their wine, show off how smart they were, deal a punch each others mug (yet without drawing a knife out) and finally disperse.

Drawing the knife out one could just as well kiss it goodbye if Kolyan was around.
He’d take it away and never return.

Kolyan of Settlement was a representative of the increasingly rare breed of heroes.
Not too large an exemplar, he was only one meter and eighty and very laconic.
On the other hand, he didn’t really need to flash eloquence – look at those fists about twenty kilos each and any wish for odd discussions extinguished by itself.
Even for a dumbo clapped with a sack on his head from around the corner it was clear at once that Kolyan would make a toast of him in less than six seconds.
Among the guys, of course, he could say something only you had to patiently wait till his word would be out.

He took me for a champion in my special line since the day of our ‘engagement’ with Olga.

At that time she and I had just started dating.
That evening before going to the Park I asked my sister for her ring to put it on my little finger.
A commonplace fake jewelry with an embedded speck of glass.
She did not want to give it and I had to coax for her lending it just one that time. 

In the Park Olga and I went up to the summer cinema projectionists’ booth – the second projectionist, Grisha Zaychenko, gave me the key to its door.
The moment Olga saw the ring on my little finger she clung like a leaf from steambath twig-bunch – who's that from?
Borrowed from Kiddy, said I, my sister.
Olga refused to believe and asked to give it her for a close look.
I passed the ring and she at once clapped it on her finger, not the little one though.
Okay, said I, enough for showing off and give it back for I had promised Natasha to return, it’s from her boyfriend.
Olga tried to take it off but – no go! 
She swerved and pulled and spat at it – the ring sat tight and that’s it.
It was some torture cell session until she somehow managed to force it over her finger joint. 

When at last I shoved the cursed ring into my pocket we were not fit for dating – Olga’s finger hurt and I felt sorry for her.
So I locked the booth and we left.
And Kolyan at that time was picking up steam in the ticket office together with the Park watchman and he saw who it was coming down from above.
And what else could he have thought if from the booth portholes for half an hour the female moans were floating over entire summer cinema? 
‘Oh, my! Mmmm! Ouu! Ay!’
So he kinda thought: where, in such a small thing as I ...well, could it… sort of…  be sitting? 
So he respected me as a bro hero only from another field.

And in the sheet iron trailer, after the yobbo louts would close their debates that it was time to kick the ass of the hippies from the Peace Square that had become too hippy lately and leave happy of being so cool goons, we still had to wait until Kolyan concluded his explanations where… well… to... kinda put… the key… well… of... sort of… the trailer. 

The warmest feelings were left by the long sheepskin coat of Aunt Nina in which Olga once emerged from the hutta’s wicket.
We descended into the snow-filled Grove with the patches of smooth hard ice of the frozen Swamp and it was good, but, as always, not enough...

At the Plant, the term of our apprenticeship expired and we began to get the payment of seventy rubles a month – almost as much as other locksmiths. 
And cutting the iron with a chisel we no longer bruised our fingers with the hammer and we (the hairy yobbos) were even trusted with the manufacture of an experimental product from scratch. 
It’s interesting.

The intangible speculative thought turns into visual lines of drawings specked with countless figures of measurements.
Following those figures, we ask the gas welder to cut the necessary pieces out from 20 mm thick sheet iron, ask the marker to delineate the contours, ask the planer to scratch odd metal off to the markings, ask the welder to weld this one to that and that to another… 
Why so many requests?
Well, because everyone’s busy, sort of…
Sometimes from the request to its execution, it took weeks of waiting or go and ask again… 

And now the skeleton of the product on the stillage begins to grow with assembled parts and look like something.
The foreman ceases to call us ‘heary yobbos' every other minute and the locksmiths not so readily giggle about the launching of our ‘Lunokhod-2', aka Lunar Rover. 
The Experimental Section Manager demands to deliver the already thoroughly-stained cardboard folder with the pack of drawings and passes it to Yasha and Mykola-the-old for the more skilled workmen to bring the disembodied idea to its final tangibility. 
It hurts.

And the next product we ruined.
We spent a lot of material, assembled it and call Borya Sakoon to assess the work.
He looked through the drawings and said something was wrong.
And the Engineer-Technologist from the Shop Floor Management Office above the locker room agreed with him – yes, something’s not right.
Yet no one of them could tell what exactly was ‘not the thing' with all the measurements observed. 
They called the author of the project from the Design Bureau at the Plant Management. 
Even for him, it took some time to guess the reason. 
His idea was presented in metal Okay except for being a mirrored reflection of the drawings.
The product was cut to pieces...

After the New Year, a business trip team was sent from our Experimental Section to the village of Semyanovka to the construction site of a feed mill.
The team was composed of Foreman, Borya Sakoon, and locksmiths – Mykola-the young, Vasya, and me.
The first morning when we left to Semyanovka under the canvas top of a Plant, there was terrible ice on the roads.
The driver drove slowly so as not to slide and follow the fate of the vehicles, whose drivers had lost the control on the ice and that loomed now through the dense fog with their wheels up on the roadside.
And no one around, just silent fog.
Some panorama of the concluding stage in the Stalingrad Battle for you.

The feed mill was a gray building of three sections, half a kilometer off the village.
A silent chilly field of weather-beaten snow surrounded it from all the sides.
The boiler room did not work, we had to bore the wall yet with breakers to lay pipes through.
Frosty iron sides of numb bunkers and mute conveyor-belts filled the other half-dark section.
For two weeks we went there to knock iron against iron, perforating walls, pulling the conveyor belts up and dozing over the red-hot electrical spiral in the boiler room. 
While at one of those snoozes, a sharp prick of awl pierced my brain. 
I started up to hear Vasya’s gleeful laughter from his satisfied snout and see a piece of smoldering cotton on the floor.
That bitter smoke had penetrated through my nostrils to the brain. 
The foreman and Mykola laughed too but not as gladly as Vasya.
A thirty-year-old stupid dickhead... 

One time Mykola brought raw potatoes from a solitary clamp in the field.
We decided to bake them just to do something.
Borya sent me to collect crashed board pieces left in the building after construction works.
Mykola and Vasya found some straw to kindle the bonfire with the firewood I brought to the unfinished weigh-bridge section.
The gate, with one of its wings removed from the hinges, did not ward off the wind and, breaking in, it swerved the smoke from side to side.
We stood around the fire in the chilly wind blowing from the white field under the gray sky and the foreman, addressing Mykola, said,
‘In four years I will retire but this latata would not get ready yet.’
He threw the ‘Prima' stub into the fire and went into the corner to blind the area with a crackling electrode of the electric welding... 

What a beautiful word ‘latata’ I have never heard anyone calling potatoes that way.
Now Borya is playing with the electric welding. 
Vasya holds the pipe pieces for him to weld.
Mykola snuffs the smoke from the lazy fire.
What to busy me with?.

I took the piece of chalk that we brought with us for marking pipe-lengths to be cut up and started a drawing on the gate wing leaned against its shut counterpart. 
I tried as best as I could.
 
Perhaps that was the most successful drawing in my entire life, almost of natural dimensions. 
Nu, of course.
Hips, breasts, long hair falling behind the back, an appetizing triangle and tempting call in the look from under partly lowered eyelids.
Wow! Nothing to add to or remove from.
And the piece of chalk had not been finished off yet.
So, I used it for block letters next to the stark naked beauty.
‘BORYA, I AM WAITING FOR YOU!!’
Then I went to the fire, because of the wind had chilled the feet of the artist engulfed with his creative work. 
Mykola stood there too and giggled looking at the gate wing.

At that moment, Borya Sakoon took his face out of the black box of the welder's mask and followed Mykola's gaze at the gate. 
No Stanislavsky system could represent the facial expression that Borya’s mug acquired a moment later.
‘Who?!’
Mykola and I stood by the fire pretending naive ignorance of reasons for the tempestuous outburst of his shattered soul.
And Vasya, squatting next to Foreman to hold the workpiece pipe with both hands, dropped his look to the floor and at the same time his piggy snout turned into a stubby index finger and pointed at me like the compass needle.

‘Bitch!’

The innate instinct of self-preservation did its job and I rushed to the conveyors' section. 
A pipe-length tinkling along the cemented floor after me.
Yes, so too many foul words in Borya’s lexicon, ‘bitch!’ as if he himself was a thief-in-law.
Good luck he'd never been trained at the gorodki game…

I returned in ten minutes.
The word ‘BORYA’ on the gate wing was effaced with a servile workman mitten of Vasya.
The rest was left as it had been.
The hand of vandals had not dared destroy the masterpiece...

We played in the Mirror Hall.
Lekha sat at the ‘Jonika’, Skully – behind his ‘kitchen’, Chuba picked the strings of the bass and motionlessly staring into the dimly lit Hall.
It was a slow number, ‘white dance’ for girls to pick their partners.
Vladya's girlfriend Raya invited him and led off into the mass of dancers under the floating light specks from the mirror splinters in the ball spinning overheads. 
I, leaning my buttocks against the lowered fallboard of the upright piano in the right corner of the small stage, strummed the chords of a rhythm guitar part.
Behind the piano, Olga stood with her arms folded over the top board. 
She's bored. 
‘Kiss me,’ said she.
I turned my head to the left and, over my shoulder and the top board, merge into a long kiss with her warm soft lips.
My fingers knew without me when to go to the next chord.
The public kiss was over and I regained the normal breathing. 
‘Oy! Mother!’ exclaimed Olga.

That was the beginning of the end.
Among the dancing pairs, there really stood her mother who had arrived unexpectedly to take Olga back to Theodosia... 

And from the other end of our vast Motherland, from another port city in another sea, the band ‘Spitzbergen' arrived in Konotop from Murmansk to start playing dances at the Loony as agreed with its Director, Bohmstein. 
The ‘Spitzes’ undid us in two weeks.
Two weeks later the Mirror Hall in the Club was empty because the dancing crowd spurted to the dances in the Loony.
There, from the concert hall on the second floor, which used to be the listing for CJI battles, they took out all the audience seats and turned into the parquet ballroom.
But that’s not the point.
The restaurant group from Murmansk, consisting of four musicians from twenty to twenty-five-year-old, had branded equipment, including the ‘Roland' organ and (most importantly) they sang. 
And they sang into professional microphones with the echo effect. 
‘One!.. un!.. un! Two!.. oo!.. oo!’
The Orpheuses with their homemade equipment went kaput.
Yes, there still remained concerts in the Club, playing ‘the trash’ but the dances faded out...

Olga's mother left Konotop, along with Olga's unregistered stepfather, after she had sworn she'd come to Theodosia in two weeks but the Spitzes got anchored in the city... 

At the end of February, I saw Olga off. 
She was going by a train from Platform 4. 
She boarded the last car and with the starting jerk of the train waved to me through the glass in the car door.
I grabbed the handrails by the sides of the locked door and jumped onto the steps under it.
The train was quickly gaining speed, she got scared and frantically cried behind the glass I did not hear what, as if I did not know what I was doing.
I jumped off at the very end of the platform because further on you could really break a leg or two on the rails and sleepers and gravel.

In March I wrote her a letter.
It was a very romantic letter, that above the locksmith vise at my workplace I was seeing the heavenly features of her face.
No, I didn't copy lines from Pushkin but the essence and spirit were the same only with the altering of the lexicon for one century and a half. 
In the opinion of the Repair Shop Floor Experimental Section locksmiths, such a letter could only be written by a fucking cuntsucker. 
They had not read it, though, and neither had she because the letter did not find her in Theodosia.

Olga returned to Konotop to inform me that she was pregnant...

At those days of the planned economy and growing concern for the needs of the population, they were selling condoms in the Soviet Union even at news stalls, three kopecks apiece. 
But for me, a condom was just a word from the dirty jokes folklore and I had no idea what ‘protective care' meant. 

Then she took the pill and everything got off easy...

Spring came early, amicable and warm.
In mid-April, I started the ‘dacha' season of sleeping in the lean-to. 
I swept it and moved the mattress and blanket to the iron bed that had spent the winter there.
The same evening in the Park I called her to ‘my place’.
She easily agreed.

All the way from the Park to the Nezhin Street I was walking on clouds.
We strolled in the dark tightly catching each other at the waist.
Through the yard of the Turkovs' hutta and the back garden under the window of our hutta we sneaked into the lean-to and I latched the door. 
In the breaks between having sexes I, obedient to Valle-Inclan’s commandment, was restoring the equality between my ‘hands that already knew everything and the eyes that still hadn’t seen anything.’
I lit up matches, one by one, for the purpose and did not allow her to shyly pull the blanket over her body in their flickering light.

We woke up at dawn and walked through the deafening silence and strangeness of the empty streets to her girlfriend Sveta’s hutta so that Olga would have an alibi for her Aunt Nina.
On my way back I met the first morning pedestrian.
It was past the Bazaar, he walked in the counter direction along the other side of the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street...

I was fine with her yet I wanted to get rid of our affair.
Firstly, it was not always good.
The time when we went to the Seim and I spread her in the willow thicket everything turned out somehow flatly and not exactly the thing.
We certainly rehabilitated ourselves later, when she called me to the shower at her workplace.
Yes, she had already got a job in the city.
She was delivering telegrams from the Main Post Office.

(...it is hard to believe, but even then, in the absence of cell phones, people managed to somehow survive.
Telegrams helped to do the trick. 
They had been delivered on the Post Office blanks with the glue-mounted paper ribbons from a telegraph machine printing the words:
‘come Friday two Moscow-Kiev car ten’.

The telegrams conveyed the very essence because you had to pay for each word and for each punctuation mark including the address of the person to whom it was sent.
Alms are the insurmountable teacher to be laconic.
But if you had money to burn then, of course, you could write in full:
‘I come on Friday at two o’clock by the train Moscow-Kiev in car number ten. Period.’
and even add in the end:
‘I love you forever. Coma. My dear. Period.’
And the workers from the Main Post Office would bring the telegram in their tiny black on-duty handbag.
‘Sign here on the receipt, please.'...) 

She ended her work at five o’clock and we met at the five-story hotel ‘The Seagull’ paneled with large yellowish tiles.
On the porch, besides the entrance to the hotel, there were two more glass doors: to the Inter-City Telephone Communication Station and to the Main Post Office. 

Olga led me to the postal service entrance on the back of the building. 

In the long corridor, she went forward alone and beaconed me from its far end. 
Some doors were open and there were women sitting with their backs to me, in front of their windows in the glass partitions from the customers. 
We descended into a wide basement hall with long low windows overhead and a row of shower stalls along the wall.
Entering one of them we undressed and Olga turned the hot water on. 

(...in the early 90s the scene in the shower starring Sylvester Stallone and Sharon Stone in some action movies was declared the hottest Hollywood erotic of the year. 
But they plagiarized it from our visit to the Main Post Office!
Twenty years later.
And now they tell me there was no sex in the USSR.
Yes, there was!
Only the term for it sounded differently…)

At the end of our hot f… er… that is, scene... there was a certain moment that Hollywood did not dare to shoot.
That is when along Olga's white taut thighs in between droplets and paths of the running hot water there crawled two-three whitish-unclear spits… 
I had seen that frame before somewhere but could not recollect…

Yes. I had started to be ‘protective careful'. 

(...an incomplete bookish education at times leads to confusion.
For a long time, I entertained an erroneous opinion that masturbation mean exclusively a handwork – rubbing your dick until you cum.
But, no!
It turns out, that even in the Old Testament there was a man named Onan, who was in the habit of watering the earth floor of his tent with his seed at the end of otherwise normal sexual intercourse.
The final chord, so to speak.
The chord, to be frank, just a stinky clam, absolutely out of tune, but served a means of protective care to prevent unwanted conception…)

Well, then, secondly, I was frightened by Olga’s first pregnancy and feared a repetition – who needed that?
I did not want to get tied up and gave it a try to get rid of the delightful cause of an unwanted effect.

One dark evening on the porch of Sveta’s hutta I told her that it was time for us to part.
She started crying.
‘Why?’
I lit a cigarette.
‘We must do it. I have met another.’
‘Who?! Tell me the name!’
‘You still do not know.’
‘But tell me!’
‘Well, in short, some, well, Sveta.' 
‘Where does she live?’
‘Near the gypsies' settlement.' 
‘You’re lying!’
‘No, I am not.’
And I lit the second cigarette from the stub of the first, as in Italian black and white movies.
Though I did not want to smoke at all.
The second one was bitter and disgusting.
I smoked half of it, felt nauseated and gave up.
I surrendered to both of them: I could finish off the cigarette and I could not break up with Olga.

The following week she announced that she was pregnant again and no longer had the needed pill.

I called my parents to the lean-to because we had to have a talk.
They came in very quiet, unaccustomed to such calls.
I sat on the chair under the glassed frame by the head of the bed.
Mother remained standing over the vacant bed only leaned against it back.
Father also stood with his hand resting on the long box-workbench along the blind wall.

Then and there I announced that I would marry Olga.
‘How that you will get married?’ asked Mother.
‘As a noble man, I have to marry her,’ replied I.
My parents exchanged glances.
Father mutely shook his head.
Mother sighed and also kept silence. 
Then they sat down on the bed and started a detailed discussion of organizing the marriage of the noble man.

When I and Olga submitted an application to the ZAGS stating our wish to get married, they gave us a paper for the Bridal Salon to sell us wedding things at a discount.
In Konotop there was such a salon behind the Central Park yet there they had nothing but two dust-coated mannequins of bride and groom looking out of the dust-stained shopwindow.
We had to go to Kiev.
Lekha Kuzko went with us as an expert because he had already gone through all of that when marrying Tatyana and knew the places. 

We found rings and Olga’s one was yellower but mine wider.
We also bought new shoes for me and a white silk mini dress for Olga, and a wedding veil too.

In August our marriage was registered in the Loony.
The Hall of Celebrations there was also on the second floor but on the opposite wing from the ballroom. 
We hired a taxi for the ceremony.
At the entrance to the Hall of Celebrations, we were met with loud electric music by guys playing ‘the trash'. 
I knew the guitarist with a long deep scar on his cheek playing a red ‘Iolanta’.
He made round eyes and shrugged.
Ah! To hell! All the same, I never was good at football… 

A woman in a dark dress, with glasses and permanent curls in her bob-cut hair, read to Olga and me the rights and responsibilities of the young family which was a cell of the society. 
We signed the form.
Lekha and Sveta seconded.

‘That is all, the end to your dreams...' 

‘The trash’ players broke out with Mendelssohn’s march and the photographer from the photo studio across the road shot us with his camera on the tripod.
In the picture ready a week later, there was a not too happy smiling hairy yobbo with a guiltily arched collar of the jacket from the last year’s graduation suit.
But Olga turned out nicely, only with a somewhat wistfully face.
Probably, she did not want to get tied down at just sixteen.

The music at the wedding was played by the Orpheuses.
For free, sure thing, it was not ‘the trash’.
Zhulka was closed in his kennel with a couple of boards and in the circle free of grass which he had eliminated by trampling and dragging his chain over throughout all his dog's life, they put the instruments and equipment. 
Between the sectioned shed and the stack of the crumbled brick, a long table was set up, parallel to both, in the shade of the two age-old American maples.
Olga and I sat with our backs to the fence of the Turkovs’ yard.
The long fleece of Father’s black sheepskin coat covered both our chairs.

Around the table there sat the Arkhipenkos, Uncle Vadya with his wife whose Acceptee he was, Olga’s Mother, Maria, with her eldest daughter, Vita, Aunt Nina and Uncle Kolya, some nondescript relatives of Solodovnikovs, the neighbors from the Nezhin and nearby Streets, the Kreepaks, the Plaksins, the Kozhevnikovs, Vladya’s mother Galina Petrovna and replacing each other guys of the Settlement, always ready to drink for free.

The wedding rambled till late at night under the light of a couple of bulbs fixed in the maples. 

They chanted ‘Bitter! Bitter!’ for me and Olga to stand up and kiss each other while they count how long the kiss lasts.
Father, together with Olga's mother, was put into a pull-barrow and shoot in it along the street (Maria was not quite happy with that ancient beautiful folk custom). 
Quak bared himself to the waist and danced holding in front of him the large ax that he grabbed from the lean-to, but Uncle Kolya started to clap in tune as if he also was a rocker and, seizing a moment, took the ax from the merry Viking. 
The Settlement guys dragged Quak to his hutta because of he already was all mops and brooms.
And Skully was copulating with Glushcha’s sister in the back garden in the most primeval posture.

In short, it turned out a classic tradition Settlement wedding.
