~~~ The Youth ~~~

Many of my classmates did not return to school after that summer, they moved or went to different technical and vocational schools.
Kuba entered the Odessa Naval School, Volodya Sherudillo – the Vocational School 4, aka GPTU-4, which, for some reason, the Konotopers unofficially named ‘the seminary’ and its students, respectively, ‘the seminarists’.
Skully wanted to enter some Mining School in Donetsk, but eventually became a student of the Konotop Railway Transportation College.
The losses in the parallel class were no less and we were all united into a single ninth grade...

On the first day of school after the ceremonial lining-up and the bell signaling the start of the academic year and its first lesson as well, our unified class entered Valera Parasyuk, aka ’Quak’.

He was blonde and already a tenth grader but, running after some girl from the former parallel, he came like just to say ‘hello’ to the guys.
The Ukranian Language teacher Fedosya Yakovlevna, aka ‘Feska’, followed him with the straight parting in her colorless hair braided into a pitiful crown.
Indicating the door, she told him to leave the classroom.
Quak complied, but went another, his own way – he climbed onto the windowsill and jumped into the yard flashing his black polished shoes for a goodbye. 

The Chemistry teacher, Tatyana Fyodorovna, had been always exemplifying his shoes before us:
‘If a guy’s shoes shine, then he’s looking after himself. Follow the example of Parasyuk whose shoes are always polished!’

Fedosya Yakovlevna, aka Feska, closed the open window after Valera Parasyuk, aka Quak and called the class not to pay any attention to him because he had been already transferred to School 14 (which also was in the Settlement) because he lived closer to that school and the teachers of ours would, consequently, have less headache... 

The best way for people to know and rub along each other is working together.
 After a week of classes, the senior grades were told to come to school on Saturday with buckets, we were going to help the kolkhoz in Podlipnoye village with harvesting.

The day was glorious – a warm September day with a bright sun in the blue sky.
We came on the edge of a cornfield and were instructed in the harvesting technique.
Pull the ear off the stem, tear away the long leaves of its sheathing and drop it in your bucket.
With the bucket filled up, take it to the mutual cob of ears and pour your share onto it.
That was called 'patronage help' to a collective farm.

Each patronizer was put before a row of corn stalks to simply go along it and harvest the ears up to the other end of the field.
And off we went in the mutual burst under the clink of tin buckets mixed with cheerful students' exclamations, the admonitions of caring teachers, and bangs of thunderflashes thrown high in the sky...

Soon I noticed my lagging behind the general progress.
Taking another bucket to the cob I paid attention that not all of the cornrows were absolutely clear of corn ears.
So they eschewed explicit explaining that we were not supposed to harvest each and every ear but selectively choose the best of the best, eh? 

I corrected my priorities and in no time caught up with the main body of the patronizers, got ahead and overtook the avant-garde party.
With me, the avant-garde became four guys. 

The people ahead of the common mass had a number of advantages.
You did not need to return to the mutual cobs of the harvested corn ears.
As soon as the bucket got filled with ears, you poured them on the ground becoming the founder of a new cob for those coming later to contribute.
Two of the guys in the avant-garde party chose the path of least resistance throwing the ears from their rows in all directions not to bother with cleaning them of leaves.
I did not follow their best practices because the end of the field could already be seen.
We went out to a fallow field and for another half-an-hour lay in the grass before the general mass approached and joined us, the super-productive harvesters...

In September, the Arkhipenkos moved to the Ryaboshapka Street near the RepBase from which Uncle Tolik received an apartment in a five-story block.
The mode of life became more spacious after our parent moved to sleep in the kitchen...

In the hutta yard appeared a new tenant – Grigory Pilluta.
He had served his ten years for a murder and returned to the sweet home of his and his parents’.

The dark turf of hair hid his forehead and his eyes looked constantly down or aside. 
Silent and sullen he passed from the wicket to his porch.
The Pillutikha’s concerts did not stop with his return from jail.
Though, one day passing under their kitchen window I heard his rude attempt to shut up the stream of her curses directed at the kitchen wall...

Father woke me up after the midnight.
The room was half lighted with the desk lamp.
Mother stood next to him, and Sasha and Natasha looked from under their blankets.
Father told that Pilluta was breaking into our door with a knife and I had to climb down through the window of the room and bring two axes from the workshop in the lean-to returning the same way. 
There was no time for dressing up – through the dark kitchen came the sounds of blows at the door on the porch and thick drunken cries addressed to Mother:
‘Open it, bitch! I’ll get your guts out!’

I quickly brought the required tools and Father and I stood by the door quaking under the blows of yelling Grigory Pilluta. 
How long would the rim lock last? 
We stood in our underpants and tank-shirts with axes in our hands.
‘Seryozha,’ said Father in a keyed up voice,’when he breaks in do not hit with the blade, use the butt!’
I was scared and at the same time wanted Pilluta to break in sooner at last. 

He did not do it.
In the darkness of the yard were heard Pillutikha’s wailing and persuading male voice.
It was Yura Plaksin, Grigory Pilluta’s childhood buddy from the hutta in the Gogol Street opposite the water pump.
He took the drunk away with him.
We left the axes in the veranda and went to sleep on.

In the morning I saw that the gray paint on the front door was scratched and stabbed with a knife.
It’s good it did not happen in winter with the additional window frames inserted for warmth.
They had no hinges, so how would I get out to the lean-to?

Then Yura Plaksin came pleading not to inform the precinct militiaman about the incident.
One of the axes stayed in the veranda for a long time, until Grigory Pilluta moved somewhere in the city from his mother’s hutta to keep away from the temptation.
Stupid indeed of his mother to wind him up and then run to Yura Plaksin for help so that her boy would not get locked up again.

Maybe, he had other reasons for moving, how could I know?
Another guy’s life is a dark abyss for those from outside.
Later I sometimes met Grigory in the city but never more in the yard of our hutta...

With the Pillutikha's death, the population of the hutta increased sharply because Grigory sold his parental home to newcomers from Siberia. 
That did not mean at all that they were Siberians themselves.
You could go there from any Republic; get recruited for work and – go.
The so-called ‘chasing the long ruble’ because of the salaries in those uninhabited Taiga places were very high.
Folks were coming from there with their suitcases packed with money to the gills, they said.
If they could manage it, of course.
As a saying ran – ‘the longer the ruble, the shorter the life’.

One guy from the Settlement recruited to a mine beyond the Urals and six months later he was brought back.
In that mine, he was in charge of the machinery and equipment repair. 
Something stopped to work there, they switched the contraption off and he crawled in to see what's up.
At that moment the switch was turned on (they had forgotten he was inside or something) and the mechanism chopped him so finely that he was sent back to his parents in a zinc coffin in the form of minced meat.

In the Ballet Studio of Nina Aleksandrovna, he was a leading dancer. 
Such a tall brunette.
When performing the Moldovan ‘Jock’ he jumped higher than others with his legs wide apart in the air to slap the ballet boots with his hands.
And the short silk waistcoat for Moldovan dances with a pattern of flashing spangles suited his long black hair...

The newcomers who bought Pilluta’s half of the hutta had been recruited to Siberia not from Konotop and even not from Ukraine.
They spoke Russian and did not understand many local words.
There were four of them – two childless couples who divided the half of the hutta among themselves. 

The somewhat older pair lived in the part next to ours and the younger ones got the part with two additional windows looking into the street.
Maybe, that’s why they were a little more cheerful than the older pair.
Although, in contrast to demised Pillutikha, the elders too looked quite friendly. 

Our immediate neighbor, the husband in the senior couple, had started the renovation of the brick stove in their kitchen and found a treasure hidden in its chimney. 
He distributed to Sasha and Natasha, and the children from the neighboring hutta of the Turkovs the bills of unprecedented banknotes from his find.

They amazed me with their face value; I had always thought that the 25-ruble note with the plaster bust of Lenin was the biggest piece of money imaginable, but no! 
The Turkovs kids played with the bank notes of one hundred and even five hundred rubles, each the size of a handkerchief with antique sculptures and royal portraits in oval frames and with a vignette-like signature of the Finance Minister of the Russian Empire. 

The money of the Ukranian Central Rada from the times of the Civil War was also played, not as picturesque though, but the curls in the signature of Lebid-Yurchik were not inferior to those of the tsarist minister. 

In my class there also was a guy with his last name Yurchik and named Sehrguey like me.
Only he was taller and when our class lined-up in a PE lesson he stood the second.
All the same, he hardly was a relative of the Minister Yurchik because he lived in Podlipnoye. 
Most likely, they were just namesakes.

When father came from work the neighbor called him to show the box he found the treasure in and the exact place in the chimney where he took it from. 
Then Father returned to our kitchen stood in the middle of it and thoughtfully said: 
‘But there was not just funny money there.’
He looked again at the stack of banknotes on the table and started to recall his village relative on the maternal side. 

That guy lived under the tsarist regime and mastered the skill of printing paper money. 
He had a special machine for the purpose.
Life smiled on him until his business failure caused by unthoughtful impatience.
Entertaining his brother on a visit from the city, he bought vodka from the village store. 
The salesman saw blue paint on his fingers from a five-ruble note he got – the brothers so hurried to celebrate their meeting that they did not let the money dry properly. 
In short, the printer man was exiled to Siberia with confiscation of property.
And his wife followed him, like those wives of the revolutionary Decemberists. 
‘That’s what love is’, Mother said in an attempt of adding a pinch of sentimental spice to the all too earthy story.
‘Bullshit!’ retorted Father. ‘She just had figured it out that with such a chiseller she’d be better off in Siberia than home.’
He chuckled and I felt also pleased that I had a cunning counterfeiter sitting in my family tree.
Even the fact that it was long ago was not too telling on the pleasure. 
Generally, anything from before the Revolution seemed to me no less distant than the stern old times of the epic heroes.
Though in the days of Gorynych the Dragon they did not print paper money, of course. 

A week later Father’s assumption was indirectly confirmed.
The husband from the younger couple (not so cheerful as usual) shared with Father the news that his friend had unexpectedly left in an unknown direction.
Both he and his wife quitted quietly their jobs and did not even say goodbye.
Friendship is a great thing, but hands off my tobacco, buddy!

Soon the younger, already depressed couple, left too.
The Pilluta’s part of the hutta emptied again and for long...

Because of the training at the regional camp of Komsomol activists, I was elected the Head of Komsomol Committee, aka Komsorg, of School 13.
A week later I did not attend classes for several days.
In a commission of five Komsorgs, I attended the reporting sessions of the Komsomol Committees in the city schools under the supervision of the Second Secretary of the City Komsomol Committee. 
Besides me, there were two more activists trained at the camp in the Sumy City – the guitar player and one of the girls.
The reporting sessions were killing with their boredom because everywhere the very same things were said the very same way with the very same words. 
And then the Second Secretary invariably demanded from us, the commission members, to take the floor with critical remarks. 
The guitar player was good at it, trained to be satisfied with just two chords he knew...

The Komsomol of School 13 never parted with their glorious pioneer traditions and continued to participate in the All-School Scrap Metal Collecting.

Every autumn the long schoolyard was divided into the sectors, starting from the two-story 'Cherevko’s school' at the gate up to the workshop building.
The sectors were assigned to different classes so that they knew where to dump the scrap metal collected by them.

The classes competed, the piles of rusty stuff grew and weighed from time to time until, eventually, the scrap metal was taken away somewhere.
The winning classes were awarded the Honor Certificates.

Of course, we hardly cared for those certificates.
But it was interesting to get together with your whole class and …—well, not all of your class, actually, but those who would turn up—and…

And with a pair of pull-barrows rattling their iron wheels on the cobblestones of the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street and creaking tiredly along the dust'n'dirt in the rest streets we ventured the Settlement in search of scrap metal. 
And where to look for it?
Well, some classmates had neighbors who were happy to get rid of a heap of perennial metal layers in the corner of their yard. 
Drive in your pull-barrow, load it all!

However, rusty basins, sofa springs, and bent nails were a too lightweight addition to the authority of your class's scrap heap. 
And the yard cleaning neighbors happened not very often.
What? That trash behind the shed? Right, it’s rusty through and through. Yet, who knows? One day might come handy. A length of wire could tie up a plank in the fence that’s so rotten that a nail would crash it to pieces.

Therefore, the newly created collective of our ninth grade went with their pull-barrows for a free search along the Plant wall in the Professions Street. 
Like vultures in search of prey.

At the far end of the Plant, where the tracks of the marshaling yard innumerable multiplied, we circled around an obviously nobody’s wheel pair of a railway car.
But you couldn't load the multi-ton wheels on a pair of pull-barrows, otherwise, we'd win in scrap metal collecting. 

We searched further, along with the railway tracks, also to no avail. 
Only in a wide concrete tube on the way, the guys discovered a watermelon and a box of grapes.
Probably, the station dockers lifted the fruits from some car in the waiting freight train and hid for a while, suggested Volodya Sakoon from the former parallel.

We looked around – just motionless rows of freight trains stood silently on all the sides.
Someone had a knife to cut the watermelon.
It did not open even when gashed all the way around because of being too big for the knife length.
When hit against the wall of the concrete tube, the watermelon broke up in two, but its core, the so-called ‘soul', remained in one of the halves. 
Red, sugary, stitched with dark brown seeds soul.

I would never expect such a swiftness from myself, but it was I who dealt the ‘falcon strike’ with both hands, snatching the soul from the watermelon.
A little recovering from bewilderment with unexpected glibness, I generously refused to partake in the sharing of the remaining watermelon parts.
The guys cut them into slices, but I ate out of my own palms, the ball of watermelon pulp dripping the sweetest juice.
We left the grapes to the dockers who stole them. 
Almost half the box.
So that they did not get hurt.

An hour later, following the lead from an acquaintance, we stroke it rich on a scrap metal deposit, although, in a completely different area.
In the fence of iron pipes between the Bazaar and the ‘seminary’, aka Vocational School 4, there was a hole through which we dragged out pipe offcuts, pretty long and so many that they made a good load for both pull-barrows.

The next day the ‘seminary’ House Manager came to our school, identified their pipes in our scrap metal heap and took them away.
As it turned out, that was the material for training the ‘seminarists’ to work on a lathe.
But our Principal, Pyotr Ivanovich, did not ever scold us.
And what for?
Who could have guessed that the important material would be dumped into the nettle thicket?
However, when giving it a careful thought, there might be good reasons for anything…

It’s just my lightning-like seizure of the watermelon soul that remained for me something inexplicable.

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my misfortunes or joys, ups, and downs, all my silly mistakes or insights sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you lying in a tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lapping of the river named Varanda…) 

Unpredictable is the beginning of friendships. 
You go home after school and there Vitya Cherevko, your new classmate from the former parallel also walks along the Nezhin Street.
‘Oh! How’s that you’re here?’
‘Ah. Goin’ to Vladya. He lives in the Forge Street.’
‘Hmm. I’m with you.’

Since that day I had two classmate-friends: Chuba, aka Vitya Cherevko, and Vladya, aka Volodya Sakoon.

Vladya’s forehead was covered with the long forelock of greasy chestnut-color hair that started from a long parting over his right ear.
Two or three half-ripe pimples on his cheeks were redeemed by the beauty of his large expressive eyes – any girl would be envious.

Chuba’s hair was black and slightly curly, and his eyes were pale blue.
He had a healthy blush in his cheeks and a little spray of freckles over his neat nose.

Vladya’s hutta porch served the place for our meetings.

He lived with his mother, Galina Petrovna, in a room and a kitchen.
A box-table, an iron bed, and the stove filled up the kitchen to the utmost – nothing else could be fitted in, except for the hooks by the door to hang coats. 
In the equally narrow room there stood a wardrobe, a wider bed, a table with three chairs pushed under it (otherwise you couldn’t squeeze by) and an up-stand shelf with a TV.
Both kitchen and the room had a window in ages long need of paint.
The blind wall opposite the windows separated their home from the neighbors’ half of the hutta.

Galina Petrovna had the job of a nurse at the Plant Kindergarten in between the Plant Park and the road diving into the Under-Overpass tunnel.
Sometimes her cousin came to visit her.
She called him Pencil or Karandella, depending on her current mood.
He brought a bottle of wine with him.
Maybe, he indeed was a relative, there was something common about his and Vladya’s eyes.

Vladya’s two elder brothers, who looked different to each other, and to Vladya as well, were separately traveling around the Soviet Union in search of a long ruble.

Vladya was very popular among the guys not only from the Forge but also the Smithy Streets. 
He knew how to ‘drive a fool’.
In the Settlement parlance ‘fool driver’ was someone who deceived you with an invented story for their private purposes or just entertainment.

For example, he drove a fool about how in Scotland they threw a log in competition, told on behalf one of those men:
‘Well, that guy did not get it that I had already thrown it and it caught him right on the pate.
And he kicked the bucket.
What else could he do in that situation?’
And he closed one eye and drowsily rolled the other one up under its eyelid.

Or he shared a local news how Kolyan Pevriy, completely well-oiled, took a lamppost for a passer-by.
He started with bullying, then demanded a cigarette, but the one who he talked to showed neither reaction nor any respect and Kolyan fought him… 
Couldn't fell, though… 

And on one of the evenings, a guitar appeared on the porch, brought by Vasya Markov, and Vladya sang a song about the Count and his daughter Valentina, and the Page violin player.

That’s when I got into the servile bondage and begged him to teach me too.
He replied that he himself was learning from Quak to who I’d better turn directly.
Only that I did not have a guitar and he couldn’t give me the one he played because it was Vasya’s who did not allow to farm it out or let anyone play...

If you really want something, the dream would come true in seconds, plus or minus a day or two.
There was a guitar!

Vadik Glushchenko, aka Glushcha, from the same Forge Street, sold me his guitar!
And at the store price too, peeping in the soundhole you could read on the sticker:
‘7 rubles 50 kopecks. Leningrad Factory of Musical Instruments.’

Mother almost immediately procured the needed sum.
True enough, the plastic handle on the third string peghead was missing, but later Father took off the tuning machine, smuggled it to his work and welded a neat iron rivet in place of the lost one.

Quak gave me a crumpled sheet from a copybook with the invaluable exhaustive list and tablature of all the guitar chords in existence: ‘the small starlet’, ‘the big starlet’, ‘the poker’, and ‘the barre’.
Just a little more and I would start singing about the favorite daughter of the Count.

But I hadn't been allowed that tiny stretch of time. 
Vladya’s brother, Yura, brought him a brand new six-string guitar and I again remained hopelessly behind because on the six-stringed one there were no ‘pokers’ and no ‘starlets’.
I had to do cuts in the nut of the guitar for the six-string layout instead of the seven-string, aka Russian, one.

In October it was still warm and Galina Petrovna arranged Vladya’s birthday for him and his classmates in the open air.
The table from the room was taken out to the front garden strip and it turned out to be a sliding table.
It was put between the hutta and the wooden shed with latticed veranda panes, which served a summer kitchen and summer bedroom.

At that table, I for the first time drank wine. 
What a great feeling!
The world around got enveloped with the thinnest curtain made of translucent, like dragonfly wings, flower petals with tiny veins. 
Beautiful friends sat around me—the best people in the worlds—and we conducted the wittiest conversations and Vladya's mother laughed in such a ringing tone, and the shadows under the bush of red currant grew vaguely deeper. 

With the onset of winter, our classmate Lyuba Serduke also had a birthday and those who passed two rubles to our Class Monitor, Tanya Krasnozhon, came to the hutta of the birthday girl.
Until then we arranged parties only at school under the supervision of Albina Grigoryevna.
We drank lemonade and after that moved the desks into one corner of the classroom and played ‘the stream’ and the guys from higher grades opened the door and peeped, but Albina wouldn’t let them in.

(...it's nice to hold a girl's hand in yours and pull her in 'the stream' through the tunnel of hands joined in pairs above your head, unless, of course, the hand you pull is not sweaty and then, becoming a part of the tunnel, you have to wait until Vera Litviniva will free and pull you in her wake. 
She’s a nice girl, but Sasha Uniat from the tenth grade is after her in earnest.
He’s a good guy, but you can never say, anyone might turn jealous sometimes...)

And in Lyuba's hutta on the freshly painted floor in the large dining room there stood a long table covered with a white tablecloth and filled with salads, pork jelly, and lemonade. 
When all the participants to the party gathered and Tanya handed the birthday girl the present she bought for the collected rubles, Lyuba's parent put on their coats and went to some neighbors to let us have a fun of our own. 
The guys started to visit the wide veranda with the glassed lattice to inconspicuously drink some moonshine brought by someone.

In a small bedroom next to the dining room a cozy disco was arranged.
There was a record player with an LP disk of instrumental numbers by ‘The Singing Guitars' and the player's dimly lighted panel served the only illumination in the room except for the sliver of light that made its way from the corridor through the gap between the curtains pulled closely together in the doorway. 
From time to time, Lyuba’s brother, a blockhead seventh grader, thrust his hand from the corridor and clicked the switch on the wall behind a curtain.
The bulb under the bedroom ceiling flashed with the dazzling light. 
The dancers coiled back from each other, squinted their eyes and roared at the damn asshole who giggled and ran back to the veranda.
The guy partner in the pair closest to the curtains put the light out again...

I did not go to the veranda and lingered at the table fressing my favorite Olivier Salad.
When I turned to lemonade, already not so favorite but still tasty, there hardly remained anyone else at the table. 
Only a couple of chairs further there sat Tanya Krutas from the former parallel with a displeased face.
I plucked up my courage, came up to her and said, ‘Would you dance, please?’
She did not even look at me, but with even more disfavor pursed her lips, rose and moved to the disco bedroom with a pliant gait. 

There they did not swap the partners and the pairs did not part and, after waiting for the disk to shuffle through the gap between the numbers, wrapped their arms again around their partner pressing to each other with the tops of their bodies. 
The slight swaying of Tanya's thin waist in between my hands' palms laid upon her hips made me drunk more than wine. 
The pulsating rumble in my ears did not abate the utmost alertness of my every muscle – not to miss but respond to the least movement of her hands put on my shoulders.

And I was not angry with the moron clicking the switch, but, recoiling under the bright bulb, I peered at her profile with pale clean skin and sternly lowered eyes and admired the bob of her hair stringed below the back of her head.
Her breasts were sooner circles than hemispheres but even what was there plunged me into the ecstatic trance of Corybants.

(...although, at that time I did not know such terms and here Father would say again:
‘Piled up a mess of arty-farty words like a dog its fleas. You, top hopper!’…)

Yes. I was on top of bliss, I was in love irrevocably and forever…

I waited for her going from school to see her to the gate of our hutta because most of the School 13 students dispersed over the Settlement through the Nezhin Street.

I even went to School 5 to support our girls when they lost in the Volleyball Championship for the city schools.
She also was on the team. 
Their loss almost did not disappoint me, I was too busy falling deeper and deeper in love with her high cheekbones.
And I forgave her her little-crooked legs. 
After all, that's a characteristic feature of the Amazons, fearless and beautiful warrioress riders. 
But how nice she looked in her sportswear white shirt!

I never managed to melt her unavoidable and inexplicable displeasure. 
As soon as I bobbed up near her, she beckoned to one of her girlfriends. 
She even changed her route of returning home from school and bypassed the Nezhin Street via the May Day Street. 
I had to wither off.
Cold snowstorms piled up the drifts upon the cold ashes of the love unaccepted...

And also with abundant snowfalls met the capital of our Motherland, the Hero-City of Moscow, the participants of the winter stage in the All-Union military-patriotic game ‘Zarnitsa’.
Six participants plus a supervisor went there from Konotop with their skis.

I was sure of my skis, the rubber bands fixed by Father stayed alright.
I threw them onto the third level bunk, undressed and climbed into the bed on the second level in the compartment of a second-class car. 

The light in the car was already turned off but behind the window stretched the brightly lit Platform 4 covered with the crust of trodden snow.
Finally from the locomotive in the head of the train came the domino-ramble of cars pulling each other.
Our car also jerked and with smooth acceleration scudded forward.
To Moscow! To Moscow!.

On the evening of the next day, we left our skis in the vestibule of a huge school and the tenants of the surrounding neighborhood took us to their apartments. 
One Zarnitsa-participant for one hospitable family.
In the morning my hosts treated me with tea and their son led to the same school closed for the holidays.
He warned me to mark the way well so that in the evening I could find their apartment where I was billeted to stay. 

We ate three times a day in the huge canteen not far away from the huge school in the neighborhood of multi-storied apartment blocks.
Except for that day when we, together with our skis, went to the Taman Guard Division stationed near Moscow.
There we ran to the attack through the deep snow drifts between young fur trees and by our side ran a soldier, also on skis, in a greatcoat and burst ammunition rounds from his Kalashnikov assault rifle. 
That day we, together with two hundred other guys who had come to Zarnitsa in Moscow, were fed with the midday meal in a soldiers’ canteen of the Taman Division.

The following day after a long excursion around the city, our Konotop group arrived at the Red Square to visit the Lenin Mausoleum. 
We joined the dense line in the Red Square and were moving with it for a long time in the thickening dusk over the black cobbles of the snow-strewn pavement.
The icy chill from those stones pierced even through the thick soles of winter shoes and my feet got awfully cold.
With only fifty meters left to the Mausoleum entrance, we learned that their working day was over and it was locked for the night. 

Our supervisor took us to the GUM, aka State Universal Store, on the other side of the Red Square to get warm in half an hour.
I was afraid such short a stretch wouldn't be enough for getting so cold feet warmed up, but as it turned out half an hour could do the trick.
The supervisor announced that the Zarnitsa was over yet we had another day of staying in Moscow and the next morning we would definitely get to the Mausoleum and then go shopping.

But the next morning after leaving my hosts' apartment I tarried in the neighborhood's huge canteen and on coming to the huge school learned that our group had already left for the Mausoleum. 

The watchman was going home until five o’clock and locked me inside (the weather was frosty) so I spent all of that day in the huge empty school.
Almost all doors in the building were locked.
In the watchman's room, there was a phone. 
I’ve never used it before and started learning.
I wound the disc, dialing random digits until there were beeps in the receiver.
‘Hello?’
‘Hello! Is that zoo over there?’
‘No.’
‘Then why an ass answers the call?’

(...ugh, it's disgusting to even recall…) 

Soon after the watchman unlocked me, our group arrived and I was told we were going home next morning.

In the apartment of my hosts, I saw ‘Twenty Years Later' by Dumas in their bookcase and asked where they sold such books. 
The hosts started to explain how many crossings there were to reach the bookshop.
Only it should be closed already.
But I went out all the same...

It was dark and very quiet and rare snowflakes were coming down from above, one by one.
I stood by the glass walls of the locked bookshop with a feeble glow of distant light inside.
All around was a vast emptiness was an immense hollow silence...

Then a belated passer-by walked along the pavement leaving shallow footprints in the soft snow and I went back to the strangers' apartment.
There was ‘The Vertical’, a movie with Vladimir Vysotsky, on TV...

We knew exactly what we wanted: to become a vocal-instrumental ensemble because in the then USSR there were no rock groups
Rock groups were an attribute of the rotten capitalist West and in our state free from the exploitation of a man by man rock groups were called vocal-instrumental ensembles, aka VIAs. 

The songs about the prosecutor who raised his blood-smeared hand against the happiness and peaceful life of an honest pickpocket were just the starting point of our glorious way towards recognition. 
Those upstart crows, the VIAs of ‘The Singing Guitars’ and ‘The Jolly Guys’, in fact, stole our songs.
It was us who should perform the hit about bringing the ring of Saturn to ask the one we loved to marry us, and no one but we should turn out that thrilling electric guitar vibrato in ‘The Gypsy Girl’ in the LP Disc of instrumental numbers.
It's just that while we were training ourselves with the fact that he did not sell pigeons at the Bazaar but hunted the passers-by pockets, they jumped out before us. 
But we did not give up.

At the breaks in the two-story building of the ‘Cherevko’s school’, where the ninth grade was again transferred to, we gathered at the window on the staircase landing for making music.
The music making instrument was a metal drawing triangle thrown on the windowsill by Sasha Rodionenko, aka Radya, to knock out a rhythmic backup to the singing. 

Chuba at once crossed out any chance for me to be a singer. 
The problem was not in my vocal chords but in my ears.
I just did not hear my own sharps from flats when singing.
There was no way to argue with Chuba who finished the Music School in the class of button-accordion and, as an expert, should hear better.
Concerning Vladya's musical ear, Chuba admitted that it was in place and that Vladya even had some voice, only it was not clear as to where that voice sat in him.
So there remained only two vocalists: Chuba and Radya.

It’s very likely that we would not progress any further from that windowsill had a new teacher of Music, Valentina, not come to our school after the winter holidays.
She looked like a girl but styled her hair in ladies' way of making a round pillow of hair on top of their heads.
And she vigorously spread wide her accordion billows out and squeezed them back and with the bell collected her instrument and hurried to the tram because, besides the lessons by us, she also taught Music at School 12. 

She said we might go to the Regional Review of Young Talents, but we should work hard because the Review was in February that started next week.
The girls from School 12 would sing there and we had to rehearse accompaniment to their songs.
That way we’d pass for a VIA from the Plant Club because the Regional Review was not for school students.

Anything can be solved exceedingly simple if you know how to do it. 

Our rehearsals were held in the evenings behind the blue blinds on the windows in the Physics classroom.
The string group was enhanced with one more guitarist from School 12.
He looked more mature than a tenth grader and did not conceal his special relation with Valentina wrapping her neck with a scarf after the rehearsals in an owner's manner and she trustingly leaned her head on his shoulder, walking along the dark corridor of the school to the exit. 

The girls from School 12 appeared at the rehearsals just a couple of times and not in full, but Valentina assured us that they knew their part.
On the final stage preview in the Club, the day before going to Sumy, there popped up one more pretty fat guy with no school affiliation who sang: 
    ‘Hello there, the field of Russia,
     I’m just a thin spike of yours...’
The eight vocal-girls from School 12 did a patriotic number emphasizing the fact that the Komsomol members, firstly, think of their Motherland and not of themselves. 
And Sasha Rodionenko, aka Radya, was giving out a song by Vysotsky about the mass graves.

Supposedly, we cut a nice picture – the line of eight white-shirted girls in front of two microphones, Valentina with her shining accordion, Scully standing behind a single drum on its rack, three guitarists with acoustic guitars hanged on package strings over their shoulders and Volodya Liman by a double bass. 

Where did Liman come from and why without any nickname?
He was a tenth grader from our school and lived at the end of the Smithy Street in the hutta next to a century-old birch tree. 
In spring they milked it gathering about a dozen of three-liter glass jars of the birch sap.
But the sap, of course, was not all for Liman alone because it was a long brick hutta-block of four apartments. 
The absence of a nickname was easily explained by the fact that his last name by itself sounded like a criminal handle – ‘Liman’.
The double bass was given to him by Aksyonov, the Head of the Variety Ensemble.

The Head couldn't say 'no' to the drummer of his Variety Ensemble.
Hardly that Liman had much knowledge or any skills at playing the double bass.
Most credible, he, like me, just wanted really to get access to the music industry. 
He joined us without a single rehearsal at the stage Preview in the Club.
Valentina asked him to play it low and not too often.
However, Liman could not keep his zeal in check and by the end of the stage preview two fingers on his right hand were bleeding with the skin rubbed off against the hard thick strings.
To somehow pull them at the Regional Review in Sumy, he wrapped his fingers with an insulating tape. 

Eleonora Nikolayevna, the nominal Head of the Children Sector went too as the official head of our Youth Ensemble in one of her blouses of starched immaculateness and a cameo brooch under the collar.
The long earring, no doubt, hung in place.

We went to Sumy by the morning diesel train.
While waiting for it, I was strangely struck by the sight of our three guitars leaning onto each other like a stack of rifles on a snow-clad platform.
Some piercing nudity.

The Regional Palace of Culture buzzed like a beehive, crowded with young talents who had come to show themselves in the Review.
We were auditioned in a separate room and ticked as participants in the gala concert at five o’clock.

In other rooms, too, auditions and rehearsals were in a full swing.
In one of them, I for the first time in my life heard and was mesmerized by the mewing sounds of a live electric guitar. 
Wow! Wow!
It filled the whole room with its swaying vibrato.

We went out for a midday meal and in the canteen, I fell under the spell of Sveta Vasilenko from the group of Chorus girls of School 12. 
On the way back I walked by her vacant side as a dog on the lead; on her other side walked her lanky girlfriend holding her arm.
The hailstorm of giggling and sneering, addressed to no one in particular, issued by my friends following closely behind, did not sober me. 

During the final rehearsal, she won me over to the hilt. 
Standing in the line of other chorus-girls she cast at me the glances of her black glinting eyes to drop them modestly down the very next moment, or direct their look at the ceiling.
I had read in more than one book that beauties know how to shoot with their glances, but I could never imagine that their eye-shooting fell you on the spot. 

After the rehearsal was over and with about two hours of waiting for the gala concert I approached her and suggested going to the cinema.
She was not sure and started to hesitate despite her girlfriend had backed up my idea. 
She turned out not so lanky, after all, and quite a nice individual coaxing Sveta to go with me, so why not?
Our united efforts could not overcome Sveta's uncertainty yet I still managed to get from her the final ‘no' and left with my heart shot through. 

I was on verge of dying to the very movie theater and until I plunged into the magical world of the seventeenth century France with Gerard Filip and Gina Lollobrigida in the ‘Fanfan the Tulip'. 
They reanimated me.

How did we perform at the gala concert?
With my non-hearing musical ear, I'm not the right guy to make conclusions. 
When three guitars keep strumming in unison the same chords, there’s not a big chance to guess whose one is somewhat out of tune.
The insulating tape notably softened down the dubbing of the double bass.
Scally used the jazz drumming brushes.
Valentina’s accordion rolling over her energetic body was covering both er-harmonic inaccuracies and getting out of key.
I believe that on the whole all that sounded fresh, fervent, young, talented and (most important!) patriotic.

After the concert, a bus form KaPeVeRrZe Plant was waiting for us by the Regional Palace of Culture. 
It was not for nothing that Eleonora Nikolayevna was taken with us to Sumy.
On the bus trip home everyone was meaningfully looking at me and Sveta, though we did not sit next to each other.
The chorus girls kept singing all kinds of songs about the eyes that drive us mad and ‘Sveta’s shining, Sveta’s lighting...’ substituting her name for ‘Moon’ in that song.
Sveta was snapping at them but I felt no embarrassment at all; I just did not care.

The next day at school Volodya Gourevitch kept repeating that I was lured to our rivals at the CJI and laughed his protracted laughter. 
Tolik Sudak from our class for no reason at all started to share in a group of guys that Sveta Vasilenko was the daughter of the Head of Militia Station and that she once came to her school in a jizz stained skirt.

When they allow themselves such offensive allusions about your beloved you have to demand satisfaction at a duel. 
However, at PE classes Tolik stood the first in the line.
He was a strong guy from Podlipnoye and always knew everything, probably, because of his mother taught Maths at our school.
That’s why I just stood by as if all that had nothing to do with me and silently hated the blond curls and drowsy look of Tolik Sudak’s pale-blue eyes.

Soon after, the Youth Ensemble participated in a Club concert but when it was over I did not try to see Sveta home.
What killed my love?
The monotonous joke and loud laughter of Volodya Gourevitch?
Or, maybe, Tolik Sudak’s report about the stained skirt?
No, the heaviest blow was dealt by the fact of her residence in the Depot Street.
That was another unfavorable neighborhood for those in love.

Vadik Glushchenko once escorted a girl to her hutta in the Depot Street and was stopped by a gang of ten.
They knocked him down and kicked from all the sides.
‘The main thing is to cover your head with your arms, then you got woozy and the kicks grew dull,’ he later shared his experience.

The end of winter was postponed with so abundant snowfall that the Nezhin Street had to be cleared with a bulldozer pushing mounds of snow.
Coming from school I preferred leaping from one to another pile of hardened snow moved to the fences to walking along the cleared road.
The fun ended when I suddenly felt a sharp pain in my groin.
The remaining way to the hutta I followed the prints of the bulldozer tracks. 

In the evening Mother, worried with my moans, demanded to show what I had there.
I refused.
Then Father said:
‘Well, show to me, I’m also a man.’
The scrotum swelled up to the size of a teacup and felt hard to the touch.
 Father frowned and when Mother asked from the kitchen:
‘So, what’s there?’
He said I had to see a doctor.
It was an eerie evening – the agony of panic and despair.

In the morning, slowly walking with shortened paces, I came with Mother to the Railway Polyclinic next to the Station.
In the reception, they gave me a slip of paper with my number in the queue to the doctor. 
We sat down to wait on the chairs in the hollow echoing corridor by the door to the medic’s office.
When it was my turn to enter the white door, I, avoiding to look at Mother, told her that if needed I agree to be operated on let only everything be normal.
The doctor turned out to be a woman but either her white robe gave her the status of man or my fear of losing something, not exactly known to me, drowned out my shyness.
The doctor said it was a sprain and I needed spirits compresses.
Two days later the scrotum returned to its usual shape and I forgot my agonizing fears.

On the seventh of March Vladya brought to school a miniature bottle of cognac.
We shared it between three of us drinking from its tiny neck.
My mouth got filled with glowing and we laughed louder and oftener than usual but there was nothing like the bliss from the wine at Vladya's birthday. 

We were dismissed early because it was the eve of the holiday and when I got home the influence completely disappeared except for the heaviness in my head.

I climbed onto the hutta’s roof because Father had been telling me for several days already that it was necessary to dump snow from there.
Four short brick chimneys protruding from the snow helped to determine our part of the roof.
The roof was rather steep and in the final stretch my felt boots slipped and I fell into the narrow back garden.
The landing was successful – on both legs and into a deep snowdrift, however, when I saw the pointed planks in the low fence between the back garden and the yard of the Turkovs a couple of inches aside, I became cold with horror.

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my adversities and falls sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you lying in a tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lap of the river named Varanda…)

End March a team of doctors came to our class for physical examination of the guys and to register us as future conscripts.
The girls were taken to another room for some special lecture and the doctors told us to undress and turn around and sit on a chair for them to knock a rubber hammer beneath our knees, after height-measuring and dick inspection. 
Filling my future-conscript card, they put "N" in the line of ‘sexual development’.
Tolik Sudak explained that "N" stood for ‘normal’ and all guys got that mark except for Sasha Shwedov and the girls, who returned after we got dressed, somehow found it out and that’s why they were whispering and giggling...

The summer began with the examination session for the ninth grade.
Chemistry was the most feared of the examinations  – who could really bottom those benzyl rings and their atomicity? 
Like many others, I memorized the answers to one of twenty-four question sets, aka ‘tickets', from the Tickets List. 
At the exam, the ticket numbers written on slips of paper were strewn face down on the desk of examiners for us to choose. 
My chances were one to twenty-four and I lost. 
However, the teacher of Chemistry, Tatyana Fyodorovna, for unknown reason started to pull me out and, eventually, evaluated my ignorance with ‘four'. 

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my etc., etc…)

Physicist Binkin was the assistant examiner by her side and had fun showing Vladya the ticket numbers from the desk in front of the examiners. 
He would raise a number up in the air, show it to Vladya, bob his head once or twice and put the number back to the same place face down again.
As fair a play as one could wish.

Unfortunately, Vladya was occupying the desk at the end of the classroom in order to copy from the cribs prepared by diligent girls who had already passed the exam and handed him their cheat sheets.
But what might you have understood from a multiple-folded narrow paper-strip with incomprehensible formulas and the handwriting three times smaller than normal? 
Of course, Vladya would be happy to ask for the change of the ticket and swap it for the one he had learned by rote. 
Yet Binkin’s fair play was of no help: he saw the place the slips were taken from and put back, but he couldn’t make the numbers out however hard he squinted.

He used two more allowed ticket changes, raising his chances to three to twenty-four, but missed again. 

Nonetheless, he got ‘three’ and a comment from Binkin:
‘That’s solely for your unalloyed proletarian origin...’

I never quibbled about my clothes, I wore what would be given and Mother looked after them not to be dirty or torn.
So my new thing—a jacket made of leatherette to the patterns from ‘The Working Woman' magazine—appeared on Mother's initiative and it was her to sew it. 
The money to buy leatherette was found because Father moved to work at RepBase at a locksmith job and his salary grew by ten rubles. 

It turned out a good jacket of a nice brown color with cuffs and belt of darker cloth.
If you looked from afar it even glinted in the sun. 
Two weeks later the leatherette at the elbow folds got fretted to its base but my award I received when the jacket still had good looks.
Yes, the Trade Union Committee of the KaPeVeRrZe Plant rewarded me for outstanding participation in amateur activities.

At the All-Plant trade union conference in the Club, the Chairman of the Plant Trade Union Committee personally handed me not a useless Certificate of Honor but a heavy paper packet.
It contained dark rubber fins, a mask, and a snorkel.

I even took the equipment to the Seim once, but swimming in the fins turned out much harder than you might think watching ‘The Amphibian Man’.
And water somehow penetrated into the mask and was getting to my nose.
Although, perhaps, it couldn’t be otherwise.

However, that summer I didn’t plan to study the bottom life of large water bodies.
Finding a job was then my main concern.
I needed money and a sizable sum of it.
Because I was ‘horseless’.

Vladya had a motor scooter ‘Riga-4’, Chuba drove ‘Desna-3’.
 Scally reconstructed his bike into moped and when a flock of the Settlement scooterists buzzing with their motors scudded along the Peace Avenue he did not fell too far behind.
Yet, ‘Riga-4’ was the coolest.

Vladya, of course, allowed me to drive it a couple of times — the buzz of the engine, wind in the face, speed operating, delight! 
But there was no use of begging scooter for a ride from Chuba.
Saddled in its seat with his feet on the ground he only chuckled in the answer. 
‘Let me, eh? Don’t be greedy.’
‘I ain’t greedy, I am gritty!’
‘A miser can’t be gritty. I’ll ride only to the Professions Street and no further, eh?’
He laughed but did not let.
‘A meanie asshole!’
But he only chuckled.
Scully’s moped I did not want myself.

 But where to get money to buy a scooter?
That was the question.
Mother said that a guy after the ninth grade might get a job at the Vegetable Storage Base, he only needed to visit the Head Office of the Workers Supplying Department, aka ORS, near the Under-Overpass and write an application at their Personnel Department.

Vegetable Base was a great idea!
There should be truckloads of strawberries and the watermelons sold at stores also should also be reaching them through the Vegetable Base.
But would they give me a job?
I wasn’t sixteen yet.
In the half-dark corridor with the ORS offices, I was more nervous than through all the summer exams at school. 
I got it!
So began my labor career...

The Vegetable Base was located at the end of the Depot Street. 
I rode there by my bike.
Besides me, there were ten more school guys. 
Mostly from School 14.
I recognized one of them: a short guy sporting long hair, handled Luke.
It was he who once slapped me in the face for shooting in his back.
He silently let the bygones be bygones, well, and I even more so.

The starting couple of days we were sorting boxes, empty, of course, without any strawberries.
The whole ones we stacked in the shed, those in need of repair piled next to the shed and the shattered remnants were dragged to the stoves under the open sky in the middle of the Base yard...

On arriving at the Base a truck with a load of vegetables drives onto a weighbridge to be weighed.
After dumping the load they weigh it once more; the difference between the loaded and empty truck shows how much vegetables was brought.
Provided that the weighbridge works correctly.

That’s where the calibration is needed, as well as a specialist who knows how to tune the weighbridge.
For the calibration process, you need a trial one-ton load of 20 kg pig iron weighs and you also need some workforce to move that ton from one corner of the weighbridge to another, to another, to another, to the middle... 

The job of calibration helpers showed who among us was who.
At first, it was like a sporting event we carried the weighs racing each other, by the third corner we started to notice which of us shirked and who was going to the end… 

Then for two or three days, we cleaned the potato storage block of its rotted stock.
I never imagined there could be so intolerable stench in the world.
We dragged that horrid muck out in two-handled wicker baskets to dump in the thicket of tall grass at the Vegetable Base outskirts.
The number of working school guys diminished to five. 

The main workforce of the Base were women in black robes and colored kerchiefs on their hair.
They sorted the carrots or beetroots in other blocks and we moved and stocked the filled boxes.
Sitting in a circle around a dusty knoll of vegetables they never stopped yakking, not for a minute.
They were telling each other endless sagas of ‘he’ and ‘she’.
How that ‘she' of theirs grew fat, then skinny, then got to the hospital, then told her mother she couldn't live without him, then died, then cheated him and fled with someone else... 
And ‘he’ was tall, then short, then pot-bellied, then bald, then black-haired, then a drunk; ‘he’ asked to marry him and did not pay alimony, 'he' was treated for alcoholism and ripped off the linoleum from the kitchen floor to take it to his lover widowed two times...
And so they would pour along the score of their chin music yarn until the blonde guy from School 14, Long by his handle, addressed the peppiest one in the circle of squaws seated on upset empty boxes:
‘So, d’you give or what?’
‘At once!’ was the reply. ‘And I’ll pull at it so that tear it off you!’
And her squaw-friends would begin to silence her with oops and pffts and ‘watch your mouth! It’s a kid you talkest to!’

For the midday meal I went home by bike – twenty minutes there, twenty minutes back, ten minutes for soup and tea or, maybe, compote.
So, four times a day I gained the first space velocity pedaling all the way down the concrete dive into the Under-Overpass tunnel.
Who, from Vegetable Base workers, does not crave for crazy speed? 
Whee-hoo!

In the morning the Head of the Vegetable Base allocated jobs for the workforce.
A couple of times I got a coopers’ helper job.

The area in front of their stocky workshop was crowded with barrels in need of repair.
I rolled or dragged them into: depending on their condition. 
Two mujiks in caps and aprons knocked the iron hoops off and the barrel disintegrated into a heap of slightly bent planks which they called ‘klepkas’.

The coopers sorted klepkas, threw the hopeless off filling up for the shortage from the stock of odd klepkas.
They planed and fitted them to each other, collected the bottoms from straight planks, inserted the bottoms on both ends and drove the hoops back.
Of course, I knew that by saying ‘he’s missing a klepka in the head’ people meant the same as when they said ‘not all at home’ or just ‘crazy’ but it was in that workshop that I got it where that meaning came from – you cannot fill a barrel with a missing klepka it’s as impossible as filling a cup with crazed walls.

I carried the waste to the brick stoves in the yard with the iron cauldrons embedded in them.
The coopers worked unhurriedly fixing two or three barrels a day and the time by their side passed so very slowly but in their workshop, there was a pleasant smell of wood shavings. 

By the masons, it smelled of damp earth. 
They worked in a long basement bunker replacing the log wall with a wide masonry. 
They also wore caps and aprons. 
The caps were the same as on the coopers but the aprons sturdier. 
I was very much eager to try my hand at laying a wall, at least a little.
The older mason allowed me to lay one row.
He stood aside and smiled at something, although his partner grumbled that I was doing it not the way it should be.

My helper partner from School 14 also grumbled all the time, however, not on the point of masonry.
His standing subject of dissatisfaction was the Head of the Base.
Being unhappy to have such a boss, he shirked the work the Head was allocating for two of us. 
I did not mind doing more than my partner only it seemed not right and I was glad when he decided to quit.

And then the cucumber season began.
They were coming in by cars pushed with a diesel locomotive along the tracks entering the Base grounds.
The cars were filled with boxes of cucumbers that had to be moved to the stoves in the yard in whose cauldrons the brine with smelly dill was boiling and crowds of barrels stood around, with their lids removed, prepared to get their load of cucumbers for pickling. 
The already familiar squaw-team worked there but they did not have time anymore for chin-wagging about ‘she' and ‘he'. 
They cooked the pickling ‘oozuar’ in the stove-embedded cauldrons with iron lids and poured it into the barrels loaded with cucumbers.

I did not aspire to be an ‘oozuar'-cooker, I was satisfied with the job of stoker feeding the stoves with the wood waste of broken boxes and cracked klepkas some of which had to be shortened with an ax. 
In general, it was not a conveyor job – they would call and tell when to add the fuel and then again get seated someplace and wait for the next call.
And I sat in the sun which filled the shadeless yard, way off from the stoves by which it was even hotter.

To while the time, I practiced taking chords of a six-stringed guitar: from D-minor to A-minor, to E-major, on a smooth piece of plank grabbed from the pile of fuel 
The women laughed from about the cauldrons:
‘Found your missing klepka at last?’
But I did not pay attention to them taking B-7th and thinking about Natalie...

When walking along the sidewalk you meet a girl with a kerchief around her neck which she had tied not like the pioneer necktie but with the knot on her shoulder, you got it at once that she knows what's what in the chic style.
And at once you feel an urge to come up, get acquainted, have a talk.
But how to speak up? What to say?
Who wants to get ‘piss off!’?
And then to feel yourself a smashed tomato.

And quite another matter knowing that the stylish girl's name was Natasha Grigorenko and you had even tried to learn ballroom waltzing with her as your partner under the button-accordion of Volodya Ilyich Gourevitch. 
‘Hello, Natasha! How are you?’
‘Oh, Seryozha! Is that you? Actually, at School 12 everyone calls me Natalie.' 

We happened to be walking the same direction and I saw her to the corner of the street she lived in.
That’s the Suvorov Street, opposite the middle driveway into the Bazaar.

(...or, might it was she to greet me first on that sidewalk? 
After all, for tying the kerchief that dashy way one needs not only knowing the fashion but a resolute nature as well...)

Whoever it was, but the next step was made by me.
Maybe not too soon.
In a week or so.
Or was it even a month?
Anyway, I made that decisive step.
Or rather a very resolute jump.

Radya and I were riding the back steps of the tram going to the Settlement, being fanned by the strong counter wind.
And when the tram rumbled along the Bazaar, I suddenly turned my head and glanced across the road into the Suvorov Street.
Not far from the corner, two girls were playing badminton.
Sure thing, I immediately recognized Natalie’s long straight hair.
‘Bye, Radya!’
And I jumped off without answering his:
‘Where to?’

Yes, no mistake: she it was.
And her partner also turned out to be my former classmate, Natasha Podragoon, who, together with Natalie went over to School 12 because of its Maths and Physics specialization.
Of course, I at once gushed some yackety-yack to the tune about giving free master classes to share the proper skills of training the shuttlecock.
And then—who could imagine!—another chance passer-by turned over the corner.
Radya obviously jumped off before the stop at our school, although he had been going to visit his Grandpa.

Natasha Podragoon soon went home because both Radya and I talked to her so too little, if at all, on account of her being fat.
Natalie invited us into her hutta yard where on a table dug into the ground lay a stack of Czech ‘Film a Divadlo' magazines. 
I got carried away with their pictures and Radya snapped up the conversational initiative.
But then from the neighbor garden, two missiles of dry earth lumps came, though missing under. 
Natalie yelled at the boy she would complain to his parents but for Radya that seemed not enough and he ran to the garden fence to whip the fool up with an elder guy's lecture. 
Or maybe, he wanted to show off his sporting bearing, after all, he had attended the volleyball section of the Youth Sports School for two years. 
Either Natalie somehow sympathized with the ten-year-old Othello of her neighbor or Radya, despite all his training crashed some of the potato bushes on his run but while he bullied the boy behind the fence Natalie told me to come on Thursday – she had more of those magazines. 
So we started dating.
Me and Natalie.

Perhaps, it would be more accurate to say that she was dating me because I did not know how to do it. 
I just came to 8, Suvorov Street on the appointed day, greeted her mother, sat on the couch and turned the pages of another ‘Film a Divadlo' magazine. 
Some folks know how to live!
Where could they manage to get such magazines from?

Then her father came home from work on his motorcycle with a sidecar.
He had the same round chin as Natalie and he gave her a permission to go out for a walk till ten but no later than half to eleven.
And we went out.

She talked a lot but then not just shooting the breeze like some others.
Natalie became my enlightener.
Despite the long years of reading addiction, there was so much I did not know. 
That the coolest candies were ‘Grilyazh' only they were not on sale in Konotop. 
You had to go after them to Moscow or Leningrad and even there it's not a snap to find them. 
And the most delicious sandwich was bread and butter with layers of sliced tomato and boiled egg.
And it, of course, should be rye bread.
And Louis Armstrong was the singer with the most hoarse voice in the world.

And following her lead, I borrowed a book of poems by Voznesensky in the Club library. 
I had seen it before on the shelves but bypassed because it was poetry.
So that’s what the real poetry meant!

But much more than for filling my educational gaps, I needed her for the moments when I swam in thrill.
For example, we were going to the Peace Movie Theater and she allowed to hold her arm-in-arm.
Gee! That’s impossible to convey!
I felt the delicate skin of her forearm because she was in a summer dress and I had grabbed her around the biceps.
Although girls have no biceps to talk of.

 I was on a full flight, I swam in thrill starting from under the bridge over the Peace Avenue, past the Zelenchuk area, and almost to the Peace Square. 
Then she explained that it would be more correct when the girl herself holds you by the arm and we continued to go on the way she shared.
Also nice, though before that…
And then I received a ball lightning strike when walking on, absorbed in the conversation, she half turned to me and—O!—her large, taut right breast pressed to my forearm… 
The bliss that stops your pulse…

So I had what to think about near the Vegetable Base stoves, practicing chords on the having been missed but eventually found klepka of mine.

It’s hard for those enlightened to abstain from sharing the light of truth they saw.
I attempted to bring the revelation over to my sister.
We were walking along the Forge Street towards the Club when she said:
‘Come one, I’ll take my brother under the pretzel!’ and she took my arm.
‘Listen, Kiddy,' said I because we, my brother with me, and our friends and all ours rarely called her by name but only ‘Kiddy', or ‘Red-Haired'. 
‘I can teach you a trick that any guy would be yours in no time.' 
‘O, really?’ my sister said to me. ‘Is that what you’re talking about?’
And she half turned to me on the move touching her breast to my forearm.

Such a hopeless naivety!
How could I imagine—even for a split second—there was something I would be able to learn before her?
I had to apologize and all the remaining way to the Club we laughed like mad at what a self-confident patsy I was.

But no happiness goes on forever…
In one of the evening goings out with Natalie some guy came up to us between the Under-Overpass and the Bazaar and we stopped for a talk.
Or rather they had a talk because of being from one school and I just stood there as an odd lamppost. 
He had a cool shirt on, I had not seen anything like that before – red and green stripes as wide as on pajamas. 
And I also had never had pajamas, but they were sometimes shown in movies.

He rhapsodized which of the Moscow universities he would enter because his uncle was a diplomat and knew everybody there.
And he, the uncle, invited him to go to the Black Sea after the entrance exams by his, uncle’s, ‘Volga’ so that the attractive nephew would serve a bait to lime the girls.
Then they bye-nowed each other and we parted but Natalie was obviously put out of humor.
By her hata's gate, she told me that she had already been dating a guy. 
One evening they were going on an empty bus and he looked back at the conductor in her seat by the door and said:
‘Conductor is not a human,’ and kissed Natalie.

And then I also felt down in the dumps because it was clear that they were kissing and with no conductors around.
I thought that it was, probably, that same red-green yakker but I didn’t ask questions.
That evening all the way from the Suvorov to the Nezhin Street I walked forever crushed by grief... 

It’s easy to determine the extent of a Konotoper's prosperity by finding out if they had a hut at the Seim river.

Upstream from the Bay Beach, some five hundred meters closer to the railway bridge, the long gully gashed a willow thicket.
At the end of it on the white sand between the pliant willows there stood about four or six dozen huts of the Partnership ‘Priseimovye’.
Well, calling them huts needed a certain stretch of liberality – just thrown together booths made of planks and covered with tin roofs.

They were small in size – for a couple or three iron beds on the floor of sand.
No window was needed.
On their arrival for the relaxation, the hut owner kept the door open all day long.
But if they were a fisherman, they would lock the door and go down to the gully where a row of long and narrow flat-bottomed boats stood afloat, chained and padlocked to the pales in the sandy bank. 
Putting the tackle on the bottom of their boat, they would unlock the weighty padlock, get seated in the narrow stern and paddle with a single oar to come out of the gully to the expanse of the Seim river and then proceed to their favorite place for fishing, the spot where they kept chumming fish with caked chaff. 

Having a hut was of great convenience – you could go swimming to the Bay Beach (directly two hundred meters across the willow thicket) and on coming back cook your meal on the Primus stove blazing its blue flame on the table dug into sand by your hut.
Many people went to their huts by the suburban train on Friday evening and returned by the last one on Sunday.
And owning no hut on the Seim you could go there only Saturdays and Sundays; in the morning – there and by 17:24 or 19:07 back to Konotop. 

When Kuba arrived in the summer after his first year at the Nautical School we, sure thing, decided to spurt to the Seim.
Only we had to wait for the weekend because I had a job at the Vegetable Base and besides on weekends, the ORS booth trucks came to the Bay Beach to sell ice cream. 
‘Skully says, Grigorenchikha's become your squeeze, right?’
‘Tell Skully her name is Natalie.’
‘Okay, whatever. Then invite her too.’

Natalie agreed quite easily and we went all together: Kuba, Skully, I and Natalie.
When we got off the train and were discussing where to – the Bay Beach or the Lake at the pine grove; Natalie suggested crossing the Seim, there’s not as much of the madhouse as on the Bay Beach.
On the other bank of the Seim, there were huts too and those who arrived on Friday met theirs from the Saturday morning train and took them over the river. 
They could ferry us just for asking.
And it happened the way she predicted, probably, because it was her to ask the boat guy for a ride. 

It was an excellent day.
We found a sandy glade in the willow thicket quite close to the river and some hundred meters from the huts.
On the soft white sand, we spread the only bed cover we had because only Natalie was clever enough to bring it along. 
When she changed into her two-piece swimsuit she overshadowed the entire ‘Film a Divadlo’ because with such lush breasts and rounded hips she had a surprisingly slender waist.

For bathing, we went to the beach by the huts with the boats tied to the bank. 
Natalie preferred sitting in one of them but Kuba, Skully and I got as furious as in old good days on Kandybino. 
Then we ate sandwiches, drank lemonade and went over to the sunbathing.

The bedspread on the sand had room only for two: for Natalie as it was she who brought it and for me because it was I who she was going out with.
She was lying on her back wearing black sunglasses and I on my stomach being embarrassed with my trunks sticking out because of the erection.
My sidekicks lay stretched out on the hot sand (also on their stomachs) fitting their improvident heads to the corners of the bedspread at our feet.
And – sultry silence…

Of course, the next weekend just two of us went to that place.

And again we lay on the bedspread in the midst of the silent heat.
Mute and motionless were the long leaves of the young pliant willows around the oval glade.
Only two of us and the sand and the sun crouching over from the sky.
My eyes were closed because I did not have sunglasses but the sun still seeped in through the blood-red fog of my dropped eyelids to turn into a black headache. 
‘A headache,’ heard I myself, barely audible.
The red mist darkened and I felt inexpressible delight – she put her palm on my eyelids.
Without opening my eyes I found her wrist and silently pulled downwards sliding her palm onto my lips.
I was so grateful to that tender soft palm that had driven away my pain and brought the inexplicable bliss.
There was nothing better in the whole world.

But when she leaned on her elbow and hovered her face over mine and merged her lips with my lips I found out that there was still something better only that it had no name.
Kiss?
When you melt and dissolve in the font of the meeting lips, when you drown in their immensity and, at the same time, you soar…
All that and a whole ocean of completely indescribable feeling…
Just one syllable of four letters expresses all that inembraceableness?
Well, well…
Anyway, the syllable was fairly busied by us that summer day.

And when we were already going to the huts for a boat ride to be in time for the train, I stopped her amidst the willow trees to kiss once again.
The parting kiss, we would be able to go on kissing any further.
She answered the kiss with her tired lips and then, looking aside, said with a strange sadness:
‘Silly one. You’ll get cloyed with it.’
I did not believe her…

(...a German smartie, by the name of Bismarck, once flashed with a witticism:
‘Only fools learn by personal experience, I prefer to learn from the experience of others.’

“I did not believe her...”
But even from my personal experience, I should have learned that my sister, Natasha, being younger than me for two years, surpassed my knowledge and repeatedly proved that.
Yes, I’m anything but Bismarck with my distrust to others.
A little consolation is that I am not a fool as defined in his maxim since I never get wiser even from my own experience.
I wonder what category then should I attribute myself to? 
Okay, let’s not get distracted; now this question is off the topic…)

The cucumbers utterly cloyed.
Already reluctantly, simply because of having nothing better to do I would take one from the boxes, bite a couple of times and hurl into the nearest thicket of tall grass in the grounds of the Vegetable Base.

So I also left the race and went to the ORS Office to quit.
I was paid fifty rubles for a month and a half.
For the first time in life, I held such a sum in my hands. 
Was that enough for a scooter?
Who should know?

A talk with Mother canceled those questions:
‘Seryozha, school is starting. You need clothes.
Shoes are needed for you and your brother and sister.
You know yourself how we’re scratching along.’
‘Yes! I have clothes! And I told you why I was going to the Base.’
‘Those pants that I have painted two times? Is that your clothes?
At your age, it's a shame to go about like that.' 

Mustang of my Dreams! Farewell! 
We won't rush along the Peace Avenue, you and me, overtaking all those ‘Rigas' and ‘Desnas'… 

No ready-made pants were bought for me.
Instead, following Mother’s instructions, I went to the sewing workshop near the Bus Station.
The dressmaker with a long pointed nose measured me and sewed trousers from a dark gray synthetic Lavsan.
Wide, two-button belt.
Flares.
Fifteen rubles.

Very soon the trousers came in handy.
Vladya brought the news that in the Central Park there would be the Youth Song Contest.
The prospective participants were to enroll at the City Komsomol Committee.
Arthur would also participate.

Arthur was an Armenian who served in the construction battalion next to RepBase and Vladya was his fan. 
Arthur was a right-handed guitarist and played it like like a god in Vladya’s estimation.
He was not replacing the strings, he was just turning a common guitar the opposite way, with the bass strings below and the thin ones up and played it! 
In addition to the miraculous trick, Arthur also sang. 
No wonder Vladya idolized him and had no doubt that Arthur would be the first in the contest.
But we still decided to participate. 
Together.
Vladya and me.

As the Head of School Komsomol familiar with the location of offices in the City Komsomol Committee, I had to go there to apply for the contest and know the exact time and place for it. 
It was to be held on the Dance-Floor of the Central Park in only two days.
We had no time to lose and started rehearsals.

The Club Movie Projectionist, Boris Konstantinovich, switched on the light in the auditorium and also two microphones on the stage.
One of them we inserted into Vladya’s guitar through the sound hole.
From the powerful loudspeakers installed on both sides of the stage, there roared such a cool sound that Boris Konstantinovich could not stand it and left. 
In his place, joyfully excited Glushcha came running in from the Professions Street where he had got enthralled by the uproar of that jumble when passing by the Club. 

We decided to do two numbers.
First, the bass guitar part to the song ‘Chocolate Cream’ by the Polish rock-group ‘Chervony Guitary’, and then the song from the movie ‘Uncatchable Avengers’.

At the rehearsals everything went pretty smoothly: the guitar with the mic in its body after turning out a classic rock’n’roll piece,  was transformed into a common acoustic one to accompany Vladya’s singing that there were a lot of paths in the field but the truth was just one.
And I stood by Vladya’s side strumming my guitar...

Surprises began at the Contest itself.
In the concha of the Dance-Floor stage, there was only one microphone installed. 
That's a starter. 
Our duo needed to be named somehow.
Another ‘oops’.
The Second Secretary of the City Komsomol Committee offered a choice: ‘The Sun’ or ‘The Troubadours’.
Of the two evils was chosen the shorter.

Inserting a microphone into an acoustic guitar through the sound hole is not an easy undertaking.
You should loosen a couple of thin strings from below and shove the mic into the hole under them and then tune the strings.
Now, with the rock’n’roll started, how could I possibly shout into the Vladya’s guitar hole that we were ‘The Sun’ duo?
For the second number the same crap only in the opposite direction with getting the mic out.

The full logistics of the situation dawned on us when we were on the stage in front of the dense crowd bordered with the light of lamps around the Dance-Floor.
Vlady panicked:
‘To hell both them and their contest!’
And I began to convince him that there was no turning back since we popped up there with our guitars.
Or, maybe, we were sort of just walking them around?

Vladya started the bass part trying to raise his guitar closer to the microphone in which I announced that we’re the vocal-instrumental duo ‘The Sun’.
Then I lowered the microphone to his guitar so that they could hear on the Dance-Floor and make sure that it was ‘The Chocolate Cream’ indeed.
It's only that holding the microphone I could no longer support his bass part as a rhythm guitar. 

With the second number, everything seemed to be in the groove. 
We both strummed our guitars, Vladya sang, I was looking above the heads of the crowd as Raissa taught us in the Children Sector…
But after the verse and the chorus Vladya turned to me with rounded eyes and moaned:
‘I forgot the lyrics!’
The further, the merrier!
May Chuba forgive me and may forgive me the listeners of the contest who that evening filled the Dance-Floor to the utmost but I took a step forward and yelled to the microphone that:
   ‘Over wide empty steppe
    Raven soars in vain,
    We’ll be living for ages,
    We are not raven’s prey...’

By the next verse, Vladya snapped back and we finished the song off together, in a duo, as it was promised. 

Natalie and I did not go to the Seim anymore.
We fell out, I really did not understand why.
In general, she told me not to come again.
Of course, I suffered painfully, and, of course, I was happy when in half a month my sister, aka Red-Haired, said:
‘I saw Grigirenchikha today. So she asks, “Did Ogoltsoff go somewhere or what?”. I say, “No”. She says, “Then why does he not come?”.
Have you quarreled or what?' 
‘We did not quarrel... Kiddy! You’re the sun!’

The swimming season was already over and we started to have walks to the Plant Park.
She led me there and showed a secluded bench behind the untrimmed bushes along the alley. 
I had passed that alley more than once but never knew about that bench.
It stood as if in a grotto of foliage.

There we came with the start of dusk.

Rare yellowish lamps switched on in the alleys.
The brightest bulb marked the window of the ticket office in the summer cinema projection booth.
The projectionist Grisha Zaychenko, Konstantin Borisovich’s partner, launched in his booth the tape recorder connected to the loudspeakers.
It was the same tape:

  ‘The twilight shadowed the light of day.
  Is it day or night? I can’t say...’

Then the ticket office bulb went out and the séance began.
The bench in its cave of leaves got wrapped in the darkness.
By that moment our talk was running out.

She threw her head back leaning on my arm stretched out along the upper beam of the bench and the world ceased to exist.
Especially if she came without a bra and in the dress with a long zipper in front...
But anything has its limits and when immersed into another dimension, my palm slid down her belly beneath the navel and touched the elastic band of her panties her head on my shoulder moved discontentedly and she issued a sound as if she was about to awaken. 
I unquestioningly moved over to the treasures above.

Then the séance ended.
The bulb over the ticket office flashed on again.
We waited while the handful of film-goers would pass along the alley before we rose from the bench.
Devastating inebriety.
She must go... 
Dad has told...
No later than...

The world mired in the depth of autumn too soon.
It became cold, naked, damp.
The leaves fell down and the wet black branches hid the bench no longer.
And who would get seated in the wet?
We, by inertia, still went to the Park, but it too became hostile.
Once, in broad daylight, a mujik in his mid-thirties started to bully me.
I had no chance against him.
It’s good that some guys from our school called him to have a drink behind the Dance-Floor and we went away in the meanwhile.

Then the first snow fell.
It melted for the slush to get fixed with the frost.
The snow had fallen again and the winter started.
On one of the dating evenings when I unbuttoned her coat to make my way to the beloved breasts, she recoiled and said she could not allow everything to a man who, in fact, was no one to her.
Was it me that no one?!
After all that had been between us?!

Sorting out the toppled relations is just firing of the stern cannons after the ship sailing away...
We broke up.
Fare thee well, sweetest Natalie.

"Ah, tender buds killed by the cruel frosts…"

At the end of February, a year after I told Mother that I agreed to be operated on, I had to lie under the knife.
A man should be the master of his word, ain’t it?

Starting in the evening and all night long my stomach ached sharply and the ambulance called in the morning diagnosed the appendix that had to be removed before too late.

I walked to the vehicle myself but there I had to lie down in the low canvas stretcher that stood on the floor.
Mother also wanted to go but along the Nezhin Street, there was walking an acquaintance of hers who was late for her work and Mother gave her place to her. 
She had always praised Julia Semyonovna as a very good legal consultant.

In the City Hospital, with all the urgency of my diagnosis, they were too lazy to carry me on the stretcher and I had to walk up to the second floor myself. 
There I changed into the hospital blue gown and went on foot to the operation room.
They helped me to lie on the tall table and with wide belts fixed my extremities to it.
A white sheet was thrown over a tall frame above my face so that I could not see what they were doing down there.
A nurse, whom I also could not see, stood behind my head and asked all sorts of distracting questions.
The interview served as a substitute for the general anesthesia because I was given only a local anesthetic with a syringe in my stomach. 
The injection worked.

I felt and understood that they were cutting me down there but all that was perceived in a somewhat distanced way as if they were doing it to my pants although at that moment I had nothing but a hospital shirt on me. 
Only at the end, a sharp pain pierced me several times and I even groaned through my teeth.
The nurse behind my head started to praise my manly endurance, she had never seen such a patient of such a mettle.
So I had to shut up and let them finish their business in silence.
But to a cot in the long corridor, I was taken on a gurney, after all. 

Two days later they brought me a note from Vladya.
He wrote that he was down in the reception hall but they did not let him pass through and our class would come to see me when I was allowed to get up and I should recover as soon as possible because Chuba had got violently untamed and kept jumping at Vladya like a Mazandaran tiger. 

After the surgery, I was recommended to currently restrain coughing and avoid any straining so that the seams did not go apart.
But could you really avoid it when having such friends?
‘Chuba Maza..’ And I crumpled the paper slip in my fist and stuck my face into the pillow to restrain the rolling up laughter.
‘Mandara.. tiger.’ 
Haha! Haha! 
‘Ouch! It hurts!’
I had already finished reading it yet could not avoid recollecting the rough lines.
‘Tiger Chuba Mazanda...’ 
Haha! Haha!
And tears sprinkled from my eyes. 
Vladya! You're worse than a tiger, son of a bitch!

Ten days later I was discharged and in one more week came to the hospital for them to pull the stitches thread from my stomach and give me the reference releasing from PE for one month...

By the by, Vladya’s handwriting was a champion of indecipherableness.
The written essays he handed in were customarily returned by the Literature teacher gashed crisscross with the red ink pen. 
At times he couldn’t make out himself what he had written and called me for help.
I was the expert arbitrator in his cryptographic disputes with Zoya Ilyinichna:
‘No, it’s not a mistake, he always writes ‘e’ that way and it stands for "a" by him.’
‘What "e"? What "a"? they’re just ticks!’
‘Yes, for sure, but that tick’s tail is a bit longer. See?’

There happened a rough talk between me and Father.
He said I should have my hair cut, for it was already long as hard to say what.
At work, he was summoned to the Political Officer, aka Zampolit, because of my looks. 
The RepBase repaired not just helicopters, but military ones that's why instead of Directors or Managers they had high-rank officers and Zampolit was the Deputy Commander of the RepBase. 
So Zampolit just ordered Father that his son would no longer be a frightful sight in the city. 

Of course, I had a yearning for as long hair as that by the Beatles.
Their ones were beyond the reach, sure thing, but my hair already started to touch to the top of the shoulder blades when I threw my head back.
At a recent CJI match, I performed the Dean Reed's hit ‘Jerico' hopping on the stage with a muted mike and whipping my face with my hair. 
One good whipping deserved another.
How would the RepBase Zampolit know that I was a son of their worker?
As if there few other Beatles fans hanging out around the city... 
I had been told on no doubt.

I couldn’t have words with Father for long because I was sitting on his neck and Zampolit threatened to fire him if I kept my hair...

In the spring our school was flooded with infection.
The most rampant manifestations of it were registered in our class. 
That was the locale of its acutest forms and main dispensers... 

Vladya and I sat on stools behind the last desk.
The seats in them were painted black and had a longish hole in the middle to insert your hand when carrying to another place.
When we got bored with wood carving and the black seats of our stools bore deep white scars that cried out: Beatles! Rolling Stones! – we looked around – what else could be done?
Some unlimited naivety: what could you do in a graduating class?
Actually, nothing...

Still and yet we found a shebang to avoid the boredom, we started writing poetry. 
It was an abundant poetic eruption turned out in various forms and genres.
At the break, we showed our creations to the classmates. 
We laughed and they were laughing too unaware that the poetizing virus started the inexorable destruction of their immune system… 
Many of them began trying their hand at rhymed lines production.
Even Chuba had epigramed some trifle.
But the indisputable crest-riders of that wave were sitting, sure enough, at the last desk. 
Fortunately, the epidemic had passed without fatalities.

(...if those scattered pieces of ruled paper torn off various notebooks were put together it could become a collection of aspirant poets.
And, stashed away in bookstores stacks, it would accumulate the dust mixed with its drowsy dreams of eager readers' hands and rising to the fame… 
It's quite unlikely that any of my classmates would recollect that rampant epidemic. 
No one would know even their own lines, you bet.
But then what for?
The final goal is nothing. The main buzz’s in doing.
Though, I’m still not ashamed for the lengthy elegy I crafted at an Organic Chemistry lesson:

“The day will come for me to join the robbers
In their arduous pursuit the daily bread
I’ll sleep all day and chew on dried grasshoppers
And in the third shift, I'll stray walkers intercept…" 

Then, of course, I got killed because elegy is a sad genre and, lying in the roadside tall grass: 

“I won’t grasp it with my head by nearing Death already chilled
If there really was a need for you to get me killed?
Of wood  was made my pistol, it wouldn't harm a lamb,
With friendly ‘Hey!’ I started the job
Of ripping kopecks for a tram,
Then – gentle 'Adieu!’ and parting bob...”

A lot of water has flowed in the Varanda since then and, quoting the classic poet from the banks of the Neva river, nicknamed Monkey:
 "Some of them are not there anymore, and I am far away..." 

Okay.
That’s enough for flashing up my speckles of erudition...

It’s time to confess that I wasn’t a stranger to swindling too.
There are things you’d like to stop remembering before starting to retell…
However, showing oneself off entirely good and irreproachable is foolish and dishonest. 
A not righteous thing, I mean. 

I am not good, I am different…)

So, the CJI final that year we lost to the prestigious School 11.
In the Greeting Contest, we dragged out on stage a dummy ship, exactly the same as two months before us, they dragged out at the Central Television CJI. 
And they also joked our jokes there two months before.
The team of School 11 came out in black top hats of Whatman paper and at the end of their Greeting presented them to our team.
I did not get my share because their Captain left his on the jury desk to help them make the right decision.

After the defeat, going home without shields but with top hats, our team went home doffing the paper head-gears for ‘goodbye' at the Settlement crossroads and I felt hurt that I didn't have one. 
Only two of all the team reached the tram stop by our school – Valya Pisanko and me. 
And then I insidiously asked Valya for her top hat as if interested to just try it on.
She credulously gave it and I clapping it onto my head ran away along the Nezhin Street.
I knew she wouldn’t follow, she lived in Podlipnoye and had to go in the opposite direction. 
Indeed, she didn’t chase and only screamed behind:
‘Sehguey! Give it back! It’s not fair!’
I knew it was not fair, but I did not return and did not give it back.
Why should I?
Next morning in the lean-to that served as my bedroom now, I was nauseated by just looking at it.
A piece of Whatman paper blackened with gouache. 
Disgusting loot.

(..so, I’m different and meanness has its share of me too…)

So, the ten years were over.
But I could not judge whether the term was long or short because ten years later it had been quite another me. 
Ten years before I was exposed to the educational system which started to make of me a member useful for the society.
I tend to think that the didactic cultivators, in general, achieved the set goal.

I grew up from a snotty Octoberist to the Head of School Komsomol Committee.
I realized that spitting into the sky, with universal gravitation in place, is meaningless.
Even though I did not have enough of Komsomol ardor to sing ‘International' together with the gramophone record of it by the Bolshoi Academic Choir, I still had no doubt that the USSR was the bulwark of peace throughout the world. 
It’s enough to just recall those red flags with the yellow dove.

And, generally, we were the best in everything and the only thing where we lagged behind was music.
Any song by the Beatles had more interesting chord sequence than the entire Soviet song production.
All the songs by us were in A-minor.

If only the Beatles would not go into politics.
John Lennon shouldn’t say that the Soviet Union was a fascist regime.
Twenty million people were killed by fascists not in England but in our country.
Why can’t the Beatles mind just music?
However, Furtseva was a nasty bitch because she did not let them have a tour of the Union.
She just enjoyed their performance behind the closed doors and then:
‘Sorry, guys, but our listener will not understand your music.' 
After they had been preparing and wrote their hit ‘Back to the USSR'. 

As for the school curriculum, I did not comprehend chemistry at all, as well as algebra with trigonometry and a number of other subjects for which I did not have time enough.
Yet I was trained to distinguish landlord Famusov from its creator, writer Gribiyedov.
Was not that a sufficient base of knowledge for entering a bright life? 
Anyway, it was too late to supplement. The time was up.
The final exams and Graduation Evening with the subsequent romantic meeting of the graduates with the dawn of their new life were at hand.

But all of that was only a background overshadowed by a more important matter. 
We were preparing for the contest.
That time the city Komsomol leadership was organizing a contest for the best vocal-instrumental ensemble, aka VIA. 
Wanted a VIA? 
You’ll get the VIA!

All winter we had been making electric guitars after the drawings in ‘The Radio’ and ‘The Young Technician’ magazines.
Long before they had announced their competition.

We experimented with the installation of piezo elements on a common acoustic guitar.
The sound amplified as if there was a mike sitting in its body, but it was not an electric guitar sound.
Besides, the guitars for seven rubles and fifty kopecks did not look like those on black and white pictures of different rock-groups with their hair reaching below the shoulders. 

Do you want a guitar with a horny body? 
Cut it out of three-centimeter thick plywood. 

Most of the fuss was with the necks.
Those that we had made, following the drawings in the technicians' magazines, left the guitars untunable.
What is ‘untunable'? 
Well, if you pluck a guitar string pressed at the twelfth fret and then pluck the same string released, you get the same note, only over one octave. 
And we did not have the same notes. The guitars were untunable.
That’s what it meant.

We had to fall back to the necks of common guitars.
They tuned okay but the headstock of a common guitar with its slots for strings looked ridiculous on an electric guitar, like a saddle on top a cow.
To replace the headstock in the neck you have to saw it out and substitute with a homemade, solid one with no slots and all six or four tuning pegs in one row. 
Father soldered the electrical rigging of guitars according to the schemes in magazines.
He also procured shielded cable within braided metal strands to connect the guitar to the amplifier. 
Without such a cable electric guitars send forward a terrible noise miles away from any music.

Testing was carried out in our hutta where the product in progress was being connected to the ancient radio receiver.
Father said if it worked there then with a normal amplifier there would be no problem at all.
The pickups presented a major headache. 
A pickup is a tiny box installed under the strings with an individual coil for each one.
A coil was six hundred spirals of a cobweb fine copper wire wound by hand.
Now remains only multiply by the number of strings.


Eventually, everything got assembled.
The radio receiver, on the verge of bursting up from randomly picked fragments of popular guitar breaks, sent forth deafening steely chords.
Mother’s yells from the kitchen not heard at all.
We’re delighted. The bomb!
Father seemed glad too...

Now you can disassemble everything, level the body plywood with a sandpaper.
Putty it and polish again with a finer sandpaper.
Paint the body with a spray gun (I bet you’ll paint it red).
Assemble your shiny new electric guitar.
Enjoy!

As a result, for participation in the contest organized by the City Komsomol Committee, there were submitted two applications. 
In order of applying:
1) from VIA ‘Kristall’ at the House of Culture named after Lunacharsky (aka the Loony);
2) from VIA ‘Orpheuses’ at the Club of Konotop Engine and Car Repairing Plant (aka Club KaPeVeRrZe).

The guys from the Loony were in the business for years.
They had an electric organ played by Sasha Basha, who had graduated the class of piano at the Music School.
He was the leader in their VIA and also the Captain of the CJI team from the prestigious School 11.
In addition to the concerts at the Loony, they also played 'the trash' – that is musical accompaniment at weddings, birthdays, parties. 
One organ, two guitars, the percussion.

There were four of us too, we didn’t know a damn thing from the music theory, except for Chuba who four years attended the class of button-accordion at the Music School, but we were backed by the Club.
Our hutta served the base for technical empowering of The Orpheuses, the Club provided means for our musical education.
(Which again does not include Chuba with his button-accordion that let him easily master the bass guitar parts, they, generally, coincide with those played in the bass section of the accordion with the musician's left hand.)

So, the concert of Classical Guitar in the Club, announced by a modest poster about the classical guitar performer Zverev from the Kiev Philharmonic, was attended by just two Orpheuses – Vladya and me. 
Skully did not feel he need it either because he’s a drummer...

It the lobby of the Club was unusually crowded, and so was the landing at the auditorium entrance.
Young guys for the most part.
Who would have thought that the Settlement youth were so much fond of the guitar classics!
So we stood up there in the crowd when from below along the wide steps of the stair and amidst the guys around us there rustled of low-voiced announcement to each other, like a gust of wind rushing in front of the thunderstorm:
‘Waflisters! Waflisters are coming!’
Two girls came up the wide stairs from the first floor.
As they reached the landing, there reigned a complete silence but all the glances were riveted to them.
I was struck by the milk-white purity of the skin on their faces.
Surrounded by the wall of goggling silence they turned to the right – towards the mirrored hall of the Ballet Studio of the Club. 
That evening the seminarists from GPTU-4 had a party there...

And we, Vladya and I, turned to the left with a handful of those who came for the concert of the Guitarist Laureate in a classic black suit and thick black-rimmed glasses.
All of the listeners sat in a pair of front rows giving a wide berth to each other.
He sat above us in a chair on the edge of the stage, announced the music pieces and played them on his acoustic.
But that was more than playing!
Something unimaginable!
 Unattainable...

After the concert, Vladya and I knocked on the door of the room on the first floor where he was putting his classic black suit into the hard black case of his guitar. 
We introduced ourselves as willing to learn the guitar playing.
What to do? How to begin?
And he gave us a free consultation. 
He took out his instrument from under the suit in his case and showed some tricky picks.
Then he folded everything back and went to the Station to go elsewhere through the dark of night.
But before leaving the room, he advised us to find Polish music magazines.
They were printing a lot of music with chords above the lyrics.
However, no such magazines were to be found in Konotop then...

After applying for the contest we came to the Director of the Club, Pavel Mitrofanovich.
We explained that our needs were not exorbitant: just that pair of black speakers from the portable movie projector, with their amplifier because we did not yet have a place for rehearsals, to let alone a drum set to hold high the Club honor at the City Contest. 
Flaring his redly hot face under the crisp coils of natural merchant curls, Pavel Mitrofanovich proclaimed that for the guys from the Settlement the Club would do everything and then everything again.
That is the meaning of coming at the right time. 

Director ordered the House Manager, Stepan, to give us the room of the Variety Ensemble until after the contest.
The Ensemble musicians supervised by their Head, Aksyonov moved their instruments from there, including the double bass and saxophone to the unknown destination. 
Aksyonov himself also disappeared for some time. 
In the room, there remained only a giant desk, a piano and ‘the kitchen' – a drum set of the kicker, the snare, the hat and two tom-toms. 

Skully was practicing the beat for hours with all his hands and feet over the kitchen.
The technique of beat-drumming was shown to him by Anatoly Melai who that spring returned from the army and who before the service had played horn in the Variety Ensemble.
He also showed us the chords to the ‘Yellow River' by the rock-group ‘Christie'. 

At that time the song topped most of the European music charts.
We knew about it from the station ‘Radio-Sweden'. 
They were broadcasting in Russian one hour a week, on Sundays and ours did not drown it with the radio noise because they talked exclusively about rock music without any propaganda. 
Anatoly even knew Russian adaptation of the lyrics:

  ‘We roamed at the Yellow River
  The flowers blossomed all ‘round us
  By the river of my dream –
  Alloverida!’

And then followed the refrain  without adaptation:
  ‘ Alloverida! Alloverida!
   Yuza mom-ma! Yuza mom-ma!’

We started to rehearse it for the contest.
At some point, it dawned on me that if the song was called ‘Yellow River' then the chorus also should be ‘Yellow River!' and not some indistinct ‘Alloverida'. 
So, it was not in vain that Alla Iosifovna was driving home to me that ‘London is the capital of Great Britain’.

Anatoly wrinkled his nose in displeasure but had no trumps to answer my demarche.
For my linguistic feat Chuba allowed me to sing a backup in the chorus: 
  ‘ Yellow River! Yellow River! 
    is in my mind and in my eyes.’

That immensely inspired me because in our VIA I had the very necessary but so inconspicuous role of the rhythm guitarist.
For the second number, we took ‘Paint it black' by the Rolling Stones. 
We knew the chords to it and we knew its name, but we did not know the lyrics and used dummy ‘pa-ba’ like seasoned scat singers:
   ‘Pa-bá pa-bá pa-bá pa-bá
   Pa-bá pa-bá pá-ba-baá

But from the name, you could guess what the song was about and if you know the meter of the lines – full ahead! 

‘Black clouds squeezed the whole sky over the city
The drops of rain from them are blacker than black tar
No stars reflected in black puddles not big nor bitty
Black fog has stolen them and hidden very far...’

(.. in the movie ‘The Devil’s Advocate’ where Al Pacino plays the Prince of Dark this song sounds on the closing credits, the original, of course.
But at that time it was too early for Hollywood to shoot that movie.
And, by the by, with that production of ‘Yellow River’ our garage VIA outstripped ‘The Jolly Guys’ of Alexander Buynov.
They performed it a year or two later and by them, it became a song about Carlson on the roof: 
‘Here we hear,
Here we hear,
The motor buzz,
The cheerful buzz.
High in the air
Straight from the roof
Our dear friend
Is flying to us...’

Thus a love song was transformed into the hymn of the RepBase…)

On the eve of the contest, we rehearsed for days on end leaving the Club only for a midday meal at the pavilion ‘Meeting' by the Station square. 
We ate dumplings there and washed them down with a bottle of Zhigulyovsky beer shared by the four of us, and imagined we were the cool dudes who can play rock. 

Literally the day before the contest our rivals—‘The Kristall’ VIA from the Loony—dealt us a preemptive strike.
They came to play ‘the trash’ at the graduation party of our class.
We had been offering our school leadership our free service of play music at the party our proposal was blinked at and they invited ‘The Kristall’.
In our native school, we were not considered musicians! 
No prophet in his native land, indeed.

Of course, ‘The Kristall’ had a well-established reputation.
Sasha Basha, educated at the piano class of the music school, played his organ very competently – both ‘seven-forty’, and waltz, and rock’n’roll, but still, it hurt.

The hour of retaliation struck at the contest.
We had hidden reserves.
Firstly, Pavel Mitrofanovich allowed us to grab for the occasion the 50-watt amplifier.
Secondly, we even visually looked the winners.

Okay, let's say you've got an electric organ and music education plus a team of musicians trained at 'trash-playing, but who would care a damn about all that when: 
‘And now in this cozy Central Park Summer Cinema we invite on the stage vocal-instrumental ensemble ‘The Orpheuses'!!' 
And there come four guys on stage with three (!) horned (!!) guitars!!!
And, on top of that, they themselves, all four are…
...IN WHITE PANTS!!!..

What meant white pants in Konotop of 1971?
There is no way to explain it because of that was long before the rise of the denim civilization. 


Where did the white pants come from?
In the Department Store opposite the Main Post, they were selling the so-called 'canvas for household needs', one ruble twenty kopecks per meter. 
From the very first wash, the fabric turned into gray saggy burlap but we came out on the stage before any wash. 

Mother made those pants—all the four—with her sewing machine two days before the performance. 
The then pants fashion rejected the wide waist belt in favor of no belt at all, the pants were starting from the hips. 
One meter and ten centimeters of ‘canvas’ were more than enough for a pair of trousers.

The only bad news was that I screwed up my part in the ‘Yellow River’ vocals.
During the rehearsals, Chuba kept frowning at my third in the chorus backup and in the last chant before going on to the stage he grabbed his head in desperation. 
So at the moment when we should be together yelling at a single microphone:
‘Yellow River! Yellow River!’
I just opened my mouth but did not produce any sound.
It was the same trick as singing the ‘Internationale' at the All-School Komsomol meetings or in the make-believe performing of ‘Jericho' at the CJI. 
Chuba made round eyes on the other side of the mike because of I left him without the third, but that did not help.
‘The Orpheuses’ won a convincing victory but on my vocal career was put the final cross.

Yes, we had done it!
And after that, we had to just live on…
‘Where to sail?' poetically asked Pushkin and Chernishevsky paraphrased the question in prose: 
‘What to do?’

"That is all,
Say ‘bye!’ to dreams
Live your life the way it seems
Right to you.
Find your answers,
Find your ways, 
Find your road to happiness.
Do it, do!"
     (music by V. Sakoon, lyrics by S. Ogoltsoff)

I tried looking for the happiness at the Kiev State University named after T. Shevchenko and took my school certificate over there, to the Department of English Language.
Unbelievable arrogance, no doubt, with all my knowledge amassed from a pair of grammar tables memorized from the English textbook for the eighth grade.

However, audacity gets rewarded and the whole ride from Konotop to Kiev (four hours by a local train) I spent on a seat next to Irina Kondratenko, the most beautiful girl in our class. 
With her black eyes and long black hair she was so beautiful that I’d never dare to approach her – it’s clear that it’s useless.
And suddenly—lo!—four hours riding together in an endless conversation.
She also was going to Kiev to become a student somewhere and live at her relatives’.
She prompted which tram to take from the station to the University.

There were so high ceilings there for all to see – it’s the place where they give the higher education.
At the dean's office, I left my certificate of secondary education and the reference about my excellent state of health and they gave me the address of a student hostel in about one hour's ride by a trolleybus. 

The manager, or just the dormitory attendant who gave me there the bed linen in exchange for my passport, showed certain racist tendencies.
When I entered her office or a stockroom, a pair of young Vietnamese came immediately after me asking for an oilcloth for the table in their room. 
And she answered:
‘No oddcloth for you! You’re an oddcloth yourself! Get out of here!’
And they left looking so puny against the background of that robust Ukranian racist.
I wondered if she was able to pronounce ‘oilcloth' in Vietnamese. 

Although, we shouldn’t jump to conclusions without knowing all the concurrent circumstances.
Maybe the happening had nothing to do with racism.
 I cannot be hundred percent sure that those Vietnamese were not asking for the fifth oilcloth on the same day or else that it wasn't the fifth pair of Vietnamese demanding an oilcloth from the overworked Ukrainian woman that day… 

Among my roommates, there was one more guy intending to matriculate the same English Department. 
Only he came for the exams after serving in the army. 
The next day we went to the University together for a pre-examination lecture. 
He was so fluent in talking with the lecturer and I felt like at that regional Physics competition, where they knew everything and understood each other and only I was an odd dolt around.
After the lecture, I went to the dean's office and took back my documents for enrollment. 

I do not remember what lie I told them.
It was hard to confess, that I got scared and surrendered without even trying. 
On the way to the hostel after my passport there poured such a shower that in some places the trolleybus had to swim from one stop to another.
The rain will wash away all the traces…
The four hours in the local train to Konotop I spent in silence – no Irinas Kondratenko for cowards.

In Konotop all complicated questions are getting resolved on the fly.

Whereto?
Well, there where all the others were. 
Follow and join.
Skully had been studying for two years at the Railway Transportation Technical School above the Over-Underpass.
Vladya and Chuba submitted their papers to enroll the same institution.
The question ‘whereto?’ was solved before me, I could only apply for admitting to the Koonotop Railway Transportation Technical School.

Even Anatoly Melai was there.
He got an indistinct job of a laboratory assistant, but before the start of the academic year he just walked the corridors there in blue overalls and was engaged in wiring when not singing. 
Anatoly turned out to be a fan of the VIA ‘Pesnyary’ who at a recent concert in the Kremlin Hall performed the ‘Dark Night’ song.
Can you imagine?
In the first row, all the top of the Political Bureau – Brezhnev, Suslov.. er.. who else? – Podgorny, and the guys from the stage with the electric guitar reverbing at full volume!. 
Well, and the vocals, of course! All their songs in no fewer intervals than for four voices:

‘The dark night's between 
 You and me, my beloved one...’

And Anatoly, throwing up his face in pockmarks from extinct acne, filled the empty corridor with singing one of those four voices.
And why not sing?
It’s summer and no classes, and the entrance exams hadn’t started yet, and he’s in his overall.

‘When I go to date you
 My bast shoes keep creaking...’

He promised to put in a word for us but of all the Orpheuses only one-third was admitted – Chuba and Vladya fell through and entered the Plant. 

In early August we made a proposal to the Club Director, Pavel Mitrofanovich, which he could not refuse.
We would play dances in the Plant Park.
For free.

In each of the three parks in the city of Konotop—the Central, the Loony, and the Plant Parks—there was a dance-floor.
All the three were replicas of each other: the high stage for a band under the concha above the concreted circle surrounded by a two-meter high fence of iron pipes set closely; the entrance gate (diametrically opposite the stage) of those pipes as well. 
Even the paint coat on all the three fences was the same gay silver.
The only difference was that the paint on the dance-floor fence in the Central Park had not peeled off so much.

Mother recalled that, when she was young, a brass band was playing at the Park Dancing-Floor in summer. 
Later, everything ground to halt and instead of waltzing in the warm season the young Konotopers began to walk in circles along the alleys of the Peace Square strewn with the spat out husk of the sunflower seeds... 

And then that August Sunday came when the Dancing-Floor of the Plant Park woke from its sleep benumbed.
Collapsed the gyves of rusty chain and iron padlock and we pulled the rubber-wheeled pull-barrow towards the stage.

Normally, the projectionist used that pull-barrow to transport cylindrical tin boxes with the reels of a film from the Club to the summer cinema in the Plant Park.
That August Sunday it was loaded with a stack of loudspeakers and amplifiers. 
We began to install and assemble the equipment, connecting, checking the guitars with a bang of a chord or two, picking the bass strings.

A short echo came back from the two-story squalid apartment block behind the park fence. 
From there also came racing local little boys and, not daring to enter the open circle of the Dance-Floor began to accumulate in the alley behind the iron pipe fence.

Now Skully, pompous and important, put his drummer ‘kitchen’ up, thumped the kick drum with the pedal beater, patted the hat with his sticks.
The finalizing check of the microphone:
‘One… One-two… One...’
Scully sat the tempo with the dry clicking of one stick against the other. 
One, two. One two three four!
Off we go!

That’s how the change of epochs was coming to pass in one separately taken Park.

The kids seeing there was no guard at the narrow gate, slowly infiltrated the Dance-Floor but still kept close to the pipes except for a couple of neglected toddlers.
Three girls entered and got seated under the fence on a bench without the backrest.
Some young pair came in.
Probably, that secluded bench had been occupied already.
One more pair...
Welcome, there's enough backless benches in the Dance-Floor...

There was no dancing the first evening.
We played for ourselves.
Then we dragged the equipment and instruments to the cinema ticket office on the first floor of the projectionist's booth. 
Everything repeated itself on Wednesday.
Yes! On Wednesday!
We played dances three times a week – Wednesday, Saturday, Sunday.

On Saturday, half an hour before the start, the Park alleys were unusually crowded.
Vitya Batrak, aka Slave, entered the open space of the Dance-Floor followed by his retinue of other guys from the Peace Square.
The ample curls of chestnut hair were scattered over the shoulders of his silk shirt in the color of the pirate flag.
The cuffs of the long sleeves – unbuttoned.
The collar followed the suit in being open down to the solar plexus.
Vitya started a picturesque debate about his wristwatch. 
The strap was unfastened, the watch tossed high in the air and clattered on the concrete of the Dance-Floor.
The guys got around to check: smashed up or still ticking?

Meanwhile, a stream of young people of both sexes began to flow in through the gate. 
That’s it!
The city believed that they played dances in the Park of KaPeVeRrZe!
On Sunday everyone danced.
In circles.

A circle of ten to fifteen dancers sprang up around two or three satchels laid on the concrete floor.
Each circle danced in its own style.
The high stage was a good viewing point.
In that circle, they were twisting.
In another, they were portraying speed skating runners: shuffling their feet over the floor with their hands clasped behind their backs. 
And over there they still were happy with the old good ‘seven-forty’.
At times one or another dancer issued a probing scream.

The following Saturday at the entrance to the Dance-Floor there emerged auntie Shura, the Controller, in her eternal helmet-kerchief. 
She kept explaining to the coming people – the admission was fifty kopecks. 
Vlady and I came up to auntie Shura.
We were outraged. 
What the heck!
The dances for free!
Auntie Shura remained unperturbed.
She was executing the Director’s order.
Vladya, lighting the twilight with his white short-sleeved turtleneck, shouts to everyone approaching from the steep stairway to the Under-Overpass to come in: dances for free! 
They do not listen to him and obediently plodded after the tickets.
Be like everyone else...

When people had been kept for so many years without even a brass band they would readily pay 50 kopecks for a blank movie-ticket with the printed price ‘35 kop.’
After the dances, when we brought the equipment back, the cashier told us that she had sold five hundred tickets.
The next day Pavel Mitrofanovich ordered to remove all the benches from the Dance-Floor so that more people would fit in.
It seems he was more of a merchant than I imagined.

What did we play?
Basically, instrumental pieces as on that LP disk of ‘The Singing Guitars’.
And the songs prepared for the contest were also sung but already without my third.

Sometimes, at the insistent request of the public, Quak would come up to the microphone to break all hell loose with ‘Shyzgara’.
He looked great with that long blonde hair of his and small mustache of an albino color.
Only that he made people to coax him so too long but then:
‘Shyzgara!’
And in response – a wild wail from several hundred throats:
‘Vaaaaaaaaaaaa!!!!!!’

(...you should have heard this song.
Sure you had, and more than once only without the lyrics.
The TV guys like to use it as a background soundtrack to advertising all kinds of female accessories.
And then the Dutch rock-group The Shocking Blue toured the whole world with practically just that one song of theirs - ‘Venus’.
And they became the group of the year, which no one expected, and neither did they.
Of course, their singer performed the hit singing:
‘She's a goddess!' 
But Quak’s ‘oddclothy’ pronunciation did not prevent anybody from being carried away and yelling:
‘Vaaaaaaaaaaaa!!!!!!’
I mean that true and high art finds a way to the masses and ignites response in their hearts in spite of any accent.
Shyzgara!!!..)

And the masses got more and more condensed.
When in the middle of the dance evening we were announcing a short break I had for a long time to push through to reach the exit and then go down a side path leading to the long booth of whitewashed planks with the letters ‘M' and ‘F' above its two separated parts. 
And – back to the stage!
There Chuba was already picking random notes at his bass guitar making to tremble the front side of the big box of the loudspeaker from the summer cinema. 

Skully’s current girlfriends with the girlfriends of theirs stacked their shoulder bags behind that loudspeaker.
Yes, from the Orpheuses' bohemia Skully had the most frantic success among the girls. 
What do girls find in those drummers?
I, for example, just one time saw some blonde Irina home.
It's hard to say who of us cooled down quicker – she, having to wait so long until I with guys was dragging the equipment to the ticket office, or I by the fact that she lived in Zagrebellya.


Then she was picked up by Anatoly Melai and he generally escorted her by a taxi.
After the driver pulled up to her gate, Anatoly, getting out with her, would ask the chauffeur: 
‘Chief, when the meter ticks up to one ruble, honk to me, okay?’
Because Zagrebellya was a rough area for those in love…

Well, one time Kolya Pevriy came up to me.
When at school he was bullying me, I even started to figure out how much I still had to endure before he would leave after the eighth grade and enter the ‘seminary’.
And now he came up with full respect and asked to go out from the Dance-Floor to his classmate Valya who also was a year older than me.
She was going somewhere to be operated from an inborn heart defect and wanted to talk to me. 
I went out when it was the break after a half-time, stopped by her side. 
We both were silent, she sighed, then the break was over.
Some romantic date…

(..how did we play?
That question I can answer with just one word –
      LOUD!!!

Oh, the poor tenants of the two-story block right over the Park fence!. 

At the beginning of the third millennium, the King of Spain asked the Jews to forgive that their ancestors, five hundred years ago, were deported from the land of Spain. 
Better late than never…

Forgive us, o, tenants, for making you deaf three times a week! 
Never again will we be doing so...)

But the life of the Club was not fixed on the Dancing-Floor alone.
The Head of the Variety Ensemble, fair-haired saxophonist Aksyonov, popped up again and integrated us into his band to accompany the singer Zhanna Parasyuk in concerts of the Plant Amateur Activities. 

One of the rehearsals was held on the stage in the summer cinema of the Plant Park.
With the white screen pulled aside because of the open-air cinema season had just run out, we worked before the empty benches of the auditorium.
The song, sure thing, in A-minor:
  ‘Icy ceiling, creaky door –
  In the Winter-Mommy’s hut...’

Twilight was thickening when from the tunnel entrance under the projectionists' booth, there came two girls and a guy with them, but too young for a boyfriend. 

I thought that on seeing the empty auditorium they would go out.
But, no, they sat somewhere in the fifth row.
The audience of three is also an audience.
One girl had long dark hair but was fat.
The other was what you would need for a girl, in a mini-skirt and checkered waistcoat. 
Her hair was wavy but short and yellow, you could see at once that it’s painted.
And she so composedly, not trying to conceal, took a cigarette pack out from her waistcoat and lit one up.
Skully’s girlfriends were always looking back and hiding their cigarettes when they smoked.

So they sat down there while we went on with another take when the girl with the cigarette turned to the fat girl and spoke up.
Of course, I couldn’t hear that she talking about me:
‘That one will be mine. Wanna bet?’

When we finished the youngster came up to me on the stage:
'That girl wants have a word with you.’
In a minute I was by their side in the fifth row.
Olga, Sveta – oh, how nice!
And in half an hour I was escorting her and her girlfriend home.
Not far at all, some two hundred meters from the Park, the third back-alley in the Budyonny Street when going to the Swamp.

 And Skully with Quak also plodded along.
Something's not fitting the picture – she got one girlfriend by her side and those two had clung along with us.
Who’s escorting whom?

As we turned into the back-alley Sveta said ‘bye!' and entered the yard of her hutta. 
Olga and I proceeded to the wicket of the next one, where she said she lived in.
But Skully and Quak stuck fast and went along inserting their silly cues in our conversation.
And only when I and Olga started kissing they realized they had no chance of making hay there.
They crossed to the opposite fence, urinated on it under the street lamp (some bohemia, damn it!) and left with a flea in their ear.
As if they couldn’t keep their taking a leak for the Budyonny Street.

How come Quak was at the rehearsal?
Very simple, the singer Zhanna Parasyuk was his own sister...

The concerts by Amateur Activity participants were performed not in the Club only.
Sometimes they were held in different villages of the Konotop District, going there by the Plant bus of the PAZ brand.
It was for one of those concerts that we rehearsed the icy ceiling with the creaking door.

Since the PAZ bus was not made of rubber you couldn't carry amplifying equipment with you and there was no room for the young snowflakes from the Ballet Studio. 
Just one Ukrainian ‘Hopack' and one Moldovan ‘Jock' under the button-accordion of Aida. 
Then she handed the instrument to Chuba to play his part in the Variety Ensemble band.
My role in the Ensemble was that of a rhythm guitarist with a common acoustic guitar.
Vladya was not assimilated into the Variety Ensemble because Aksyonov, with his saxophone, didn't need a solo-guitar.
And Skully remained the drummer, with his ‘kitchen’ minimized to the skeleton composition – the snare and the hat to pat his sticks upon.

Murashkovsky was the universally recognized cream of the program; singing songs and telling ‘humoreskas’.
The rhymed stories about ‘me and my koom', were his specialty.
About how we, together with the koom, aka sister-in-law’s husband,  smashed the football goal clean away with koom's head, and riding a motorcycle collided with a bull and the bull threw us over the oak-tree just for free…
Simple rhyme, solid wit. 
The audience liked it – they laughed and clapped.

And then on the stage again appeared Zhanna the Singer and we – her band. 
Skully had sat the tempo, we started and I felt that the guitar strings under my fingers were loosened to the utmost.
Aksyonov loosened them during a humoreska or maybe Hopack to have a hearty laugh.
Some joker thick-cheeked.
Okay, Chuba and the Skully kept making up for chords and rhythm and I, like scenery alive, struck the strings without pressing them to the frets – as if I was playing a klepka...

At the end of the concert, Muraskovsky as always burst out his main ‘bomb' – the humoreska about the Acceptee and his Mother-in-Law. 

(...in those days the word ‘mother-in-law', aka 'teshcha', was the most magical incantation of stand-up comedians. 
It was enough for a man on the stage to say ‘teshcha!’ and the audience laughed and laughed.
Nowadays the population has become much more sophisticated, spoiled with cultivated humor; now an actor in the comic genre must breathe in deeply and scream into the microphone at the top of their lungs ‘asshole!!!' for the audience to get it – that's time to laugh. 

Okay, we're going back to the concert in a village club in the early seventies…) 

Murashkovsky rushes with screams from the back door through the entire small hall of the club to its stage.
He drags along the case of button-accordion in his hands, like,  that's his suitcase with personal belongings. 
On climbing the stage he starts the first-person humoreska about Acceptee’s life full of bitter pain.
His wife together with her Mom, aka teshcha, submitted him to the militia to keep at the Sobering Station and save from going on a binge.
As they were keeping him there for fifteen days he prepared his plan for revenge.

Returning from his fifteen-day confinement to the place of residence he casually breaks the news that the barrel with pickled cucumbers in the earth cellar-pit has gone to pieces… 

(The audience enlivens and starts to giggle.) 

The worried wife and teshcha race down the ladder in the cellar-pit and Acceptee from above the ladder top proclaims the biblical principle of ‘eye for an eye' and announces his verdict to them—fifteen days of incarceration—before slamming the cellar-pit lid. 

(The hall drowns in the jubilant glee.)

Every other day Acceptee drops packages with certain food items on a string to the captives, as an addition to the vegetable stored down there.

(Decibels of the thundering laughter reach the neighboring village.
The spectators with a particularly vivid imagination cannot laugh anymore – they just jerk their heads up with their mouths convulsively open, their eyes squeezed and dripping tears which they have nothing to wipe with because of their hands balled into fists are knocking on the back of the seat in the previous row.) 

Four days later, the militia called by someone of the villagers set the captives free and Acceptee gets another fifteen days of confinement. 

(‘Boo-ha-ha' in the audience begins to look like a collective fit.) 

Murashkovsky throws to them the final lines, like a bullfighter finishing the bull off.
‘Okay, I’m leaving.
You’ll never find another one like me.
And I won’t burn up your hutta, even though I could do that!’

Normally, at these words, the audience reacted with a farewell burst of laughter capable of blowing the doors and windows out together with their frames. 
Murashkovsky prepares for a bow to the general ovation and…
Silence.
Not a sound.
All froze like exhibits at the Madam Tussauds Theater of Wax Figures.
Only from somewhere in the seventeenth row comes a tiny plop of a tear giggled out just a moment before...

Then the seat backs begin to creak.
The chairman of the Village Council cautiously steps up onto the stage with a crumpled word of gratitude for the concert.
The audience cowedly disperse.
Behind the scenes Aksyonov and Skully pinion Murashkovsky in a heavy fit of hysterics.
No one knows how to appease him.

The instruments and costumes were in a record time stuffed into the bus.
All got seated in the Club Manager office for the traditional gratitude treat: bread, lard, cucumbers, moonshine.
After the first glass the Chairman of the Village Council was awkwardly bringing apology to Murashkovsky:
‘Well, here… er… in our village three huttas were burnt in a month… they couldn’t find who...’

Director of the Plant Club, Pavel Mitrofanovich, blushing more and more in his face, kept control that the bus driver would not drink more than two glasses and after the third, we leave into the night. 

At that time the taste of moonshine still made me wince so a couple of gulps followed with bread and lard were quickly worn away. 
I watched the impenetrable night stretching behind the window glass.
The driver committed his whole soul to speed and pressed the gas pedal right to the floor.
We flew.
We shot along the soft dirt roads of the district.
The headlights snatched from the darkness the trunks and branches of roadside trees.
At times huttas of a village rushed by.
A guy and a girl standing by a hutta fence.
Seeing her home.
They looked back at the passing bus.
They thought ‘the folks manage to enjoy their lives, they in the city live’.
They envied me.

Strange as it was, but I envied them.
Seeing her home.
I also wanted that.
In the warmly dark Ukrainian night...
But I had Olga.
In the back-alley where she lived, it was the same night.
But I still envied that guy.
Strange.

Olga was good at kissing and liked it, not for nothing she had such sensual lips.
The bitter taste of burnt tobacco on her breath did not distract me too much.
And then, at the next seeing her home (to the hutta’s gate) she shared a cigarette with me.
I tried it with misgivings, but all went off without the side effects and I started to smoke. 

The hutta which I escorted her to was her aunt’s home.
Olga came to stay with her that summer.
She herself was from Theodosia in the Crimea where she had her mother and elder sister.
Her father died when she was twelve years old.
An accident with a tractor. 
She loved him so much that sometimes she went to the cemetery at the dead of night to cry by the low monument of rebars with the tablet on it ‘Abram Kosmenko’.
Some name, ain’t it? But he wasn’t a jew just so was his name.
Her mother found a stepfather for her and her sister, without registering at the ZAGS though. 
A musician, knocking on drums.

Once Olga lay on the couch with the temperature watching TV.
He got seated at her feet and covered his lap with the corner of her blanket.
Her mother saw it and raise a hell with her screams.
Then she went in for athletics.
Sprinting one hundred.
The coach said she had a good physique for that sport. 
They were taken to Simferopol for competitions.
Before the dash the coach made everybody eat a whole lemon. Without sprinkling it with sugar.
He said:
'Gets straight into the blood!'

So, between the kisses, we were getting known each other more and more. 

After that concert Skully, Vladya and I went to the Seim River for an overnight stay.
Skully and I brought with us a large vinyl bag by the evening local train.
Father had fetched it from the RepBase.
Such bags were used for wrapping some helicopter spare parts.
A big translucent bag would do for a three-man tent.
We also brought a guitar and then Vladya arrived on his scooter ‘Riga-4’ and brought the
dinner.
We put the bag-tent on a sandy spit overgrown with the willow thicket not far from the railway bridge.

It was getting dark and we built a fire.
We had a bottle of wine for which Vladya brought lots of grub, too much, actually, and we scattered more than ate.
No one cared, in the morning Vladya had to ride to Konotop for more.

Vladya began to play the guitar breaks from different rock’n’roll hits.
Above the placid water, the guitar sounds great, so clear, so full and… nyshtyak, in a word, it sounds there. 
One fisherman in his boat anchored in the middle of the river liked it and asked to cut more.
But when we started ‘Shyzgara!’ another night catcher from afar – near the other bank – began to curse us for scaring off his fish.
Skully advised not to mess around with him, the man could go and call more mujiks from the huts.
The fire burnt out and we crawled under the vinyl roof...

At dawn, I woke up from water dripping into my face. 
Vinyl is absolutely water- and air-proof.
Our breathing settled on the chilled with the August night vinyl and turned into water droplets – the condensate.
They did not teach us at school about such things.
So we met the morning cold and hungry.
I hardly could persuade Vladya to entrust me with his ‘Riga-4’ to drive instead of him after some food from the city.

Yes, motors are the real thing. You don’t have to pedal or pull anything, the only effort is twisting the throttle handle and steering.

I drove into the city mapping the routes in my mind: first – home, then to the Skully’s hutta, after that to the Vladya’s and back to the Seim river.

‘Plans on paper looked just fine
Yet they’d forgotten the ravine...’

Entering the left turn between the Station and the Loony Park I heard my name.
Over the Station square, Olga was dashing in her red mini-skirt. 
The coach was right – that's some physique!
I throttled down and let the scooter come to a stop...

She ran up with no panting to speak of and let me have it: it's three days that I'd disappeared no one knew where if I did not want going out with her I didn't have to she didn't care because yesterday she got a telegram from her mother inviting to a telephone talk with Theodosia and she said that's enough for staying with her aunt she had to go back in two days but I didn't care I rushed to the Seim with my friends who were more dear to me fuck such friends and she was just a fool to think she had found someone she could trust and if she was dear to me I had to stay with her now. 

After the cold condensate shower so heated a raging, and the threat of parting, and a hope – what if she let have it off for a farewell? – had their job done.
I only begged for a couple of hours – to take the scooter to Vladya’s hutta and go to change before our meeting in the Park…

That's the way they become a doormat. 
That’s how they betray their friends.
No doubt, my friends came from the Seim by the five-hour train after they combed the entire sand spit in search of scraps that they had so thoughtlessly scattered hither and thither at the orgy the night before. 
Who but I could understand them better?
Once I myself almost fainted from hunger on the Seim.
They did not want to even talk to me boycotting for three days.
And who but I could understand them better?
You couldn't boycott a guy for longer than three days if you played dances with him and your only means of communication was through Chuba. 

(...it's mean to betray your friends… 
Yet from all the mean deeds in my life that one, for some reason, I regret the least. 
Although, of course, I am sorry. 
‘A skirt chaser, a doormat, he betrayed his homeboys for a piece of the smelly hole, betrayed for a ho!’ would say 95% of real guys.
Well, okay, it was overdone – 93% the exact number.
And I would understand them.
And I agree with them.
But most of all I’d pity them.
Too bad luck, they had not come across a woman for whose sake it’d be worth betraying...)

Now, Olga. 
Of course, her breasts in size were much inferior to those of Natalie. 
And they were not sticking out as it’s prescribed to the breasts of virgins in literary traditions.
But when I, having unbuttoned her blouse and my shirt, for the first time pressed them against my chest, I was amazed at the immensity of the sensation from the female flesh.
She did not have a bra on at that moment after dropping for a minute in the dark yard of her hutta.

The fact of her breasts smallness and the nipples not being too hard she explained by diving from a cliff after rapans. 
The depth turned out to be too great and then in the hospital they had to pierce her breasts.

(..some whopper for my sucker ears?
I have no idea.
With my excessive dupability, I believe anything they tell me. 
Yes, I mean it, while listening I believe anything from anyone.
And because of my no less fundamental thought retardation, the logical evaluation of the heard comes to me the next day or later. 
But at that time I did not care for no logic – be it rapans or other fish.
It’s only now I’m curious at times – what kind of crap could be them those rapans?
But then I’m lazy to check it with the Google…)

But the unconditionally captivating thing about her was her legs. 

(..the sexual revolution was then at its culmination all over the world, and the laws of revolutionary times have no mercy and even more so the laws of revolutionary fashion. 

In modern democratic times, you can wear whatever you want – be it maxi or midi or unisex. 
You can even spend all of your life in sportswear if only, sure thing, there are Adidas strips on it.

The sexual revolution established the dictatorship of mini.
So, if you considered yourself a woman you had to bare your knees.
Law is the law.
If you hadn’t counted yourself out of the fair sex your skirt or dress should end at least three centimeters above your knees.
The law is harsh, but it is just or – go and join the pensioner oldies on the bench in the yard...) 

Olga’s mini was twenty centimeters above her knees.
Therefore, getting seated she chastely dropped her hand between her sportingly ripe thighs so as not to flash her panties.

And on that shining sunny day standing by the tunnel of the Under-Overpass and watching her skipping down the stairs from the Plant Park in a nimble athletic style with that sports haircut and in that red miniskirt of hers I realized that I was born in the epoch really worth to be born into. 
A flick of the wind tossed her mini up and she, on the run, sat it back with the classic gesture of Marilyn Monroe from another era.

(...at such moments all the rapans in the world and hungry bros chewing the dry scraps of bread sprinkled with riverside sand can go to hell for all I care!

‘...two legs… sad, and cold, and weary
 I still remember them...’

Or, as another, the more pragmatic elect of the muses, cared to put it:
‘Olga, for your legs, I'd give anything except for the payday and the day off!'…) 

He was her co-worker at the Rags where she got a job because she didn’t go to her mother in Theodosia but stayed in Konotop by her aunt.
The Rags was how they called Recycling Factory in Konotop.
It on the very edge of the city – the first stop of the local train going to the Seim. 
Why so far?
Because they’re not too scrupulous about the labor legislation at Rags and Olga then was barely fifteen.

On the first of September, I came to the Konotop Railway Transportation Technical School together with my brother and sister who entered there after the eighth grade. 
The students were grouped and lined-up in the courtyard and the Technical School Director started to push his speech.
I felt like a zek who after serving his ten-year stretch had got three more years for nothing.

When the lining-up came to the end I went to the Personnel Department of the Technical School, took my papers back and went to enter the KaPeVeRrZe Plant.
I was given a job at the same shop floor where Vladya was already an apprentice of a locksmith – in the Experimental Section of Metal Constructions by the Repair Shop Floor.

Like most other shops in the KaPeVeRrZe Plant, the Mechanical Shop Floor was built of refractory-like brick.
It had straight even walls without any ante-revolutionary brick lace-work. 
The spacious building was one hundred and thirty meters in length, eight in height and thirty meters wide.
High above, under the roof, there rambled a cross-beam with the crane-operator cab along the rails put by the wall up there. 
The huge hook on the thick steel cable hung from the telpher running along the beam with the cab at the right end to which the crane operator climbed up the ladder fixed in the Shop Floor wall. 
Three wings of lesser height were attached to the building of the Mechanical Shop Floor.
The first wing from the entrance was the separate Tools Shop Floor and the remaining two were parts of the Mechanical Shop Floor only smaller and with no cross-beams.

The central aisle in the Mechanical Shop Floor was wide enough for two autokars to go side by side.
 An autokar was a self-propelled cart on small but sturdy wheels with no tires.
It had a small pad in front for a driver to stand on.
Between the driver and the cargo platform, there was an upright narrow metal box with two parallel levers protruding ahead from its sides so that the driver could hold onto them. 
But it only seemed so, in fact, the driver steered the autokar with those levers taking left or right turns. 
Autokar, actually, was a kind of a pullme-pushyu.
It needed no U-turns after getting loaded or unloaded in some nooky place.
The driver themselves turned on their pad and drove back.
Some clever invention.

The floor in the Shop Floor was concrete but with all engine oil splashes and autokar wheel prints, it ages ago became black as an asphalt. 

The central aisle about thirty meters before the end wall was crossed by the road from one of the wings to another and fenced with the upright iron pipes on the opposite roadside.
That was the border – the grounds of the Repair Shop Floor began behind the pipes.
The border, of course, was transparent with three duty-free entries – two along the walls and one in the center.

Past the left border-crossing, under the iron stairway, there was a wooden door in the wall opening to the workmen locker room. 
Next, after the door, a wooden desk stood abutting the wall, with one-plank benches on each side of it and a couple of cardboard file-folders, plump and smeared, on its top – the Foremen's nest. 
It was followed by a spacious workbench under the tall windows in the wall.
The row of huge vises (eight all in all) ran to the far end of the workbench.
The first in the row was Yasha's vise, then – Mykola-the-old's, further – Peter's, still further – Mykola-the-young's and so on to the gate in the same wall with the railway track entering the Shop Floor under the transverse end wall. 

The front of the workbench was lined with sheet iron and sheet iron doors with neat small padlocks under each of the vises opened the tool compartments.
The first was Yasha’s compartment, then Mykola-the-old’s and, well, so on...

On the second floor, above the locker room, there was the office of the Repair Shop Floor Management.
That’s where led the iron stairway of two flights with handrails and the landing in front of the office door.
And from the same landing, the narrow wall-fixed ladder went up to the cab of the cross-beam for the crane operator to get there in the morning or after the midday break and rumble away to the Mechanical Shop Floor. 

The railway track at the far end of the Repair Shop Floor was a dead end.
The bulky things in need of repair were pushed in there heaped on railway platforms while those of smaller size were brought by autokars.

At a two-meter distance from the track and parallel to it stretched the end wall. 
It also had huge tall windows latticed with iron bindings to hold the panes of dusty glass.
In the wall center above the windows, there was a large round clock under the roof like those at the railway stations. 
The electrical clock kept slumbering until the sudden ‘tick!’ when the half-meter hand jumped for two minutes at once to fall asleep again until the following ‘tick!’.

The third wall had the same tall windows.
Next to the border-crossing from the Mechanical Shop Floor there stood a drilling machine for anyone to use. 
Then came the huge table of the marker and in the corner after the tracks dead end the lathe with its turner.

Along the central axis of the Repair Shop Floor, there was another long workbench or rather two of them put abutting each other face-to-face, with an iron mesh partition in between. 
Safety rules: if a hammer flew out of hand then the mesh would not let it knock out a workman at the opposite workbench.

Walking the Shop Floor you needed to look before you stepped: giant worm gears, oil-smeared casings, and other whatnots scattered the floor indiscriminately. 
The things that had been brought by an autokar and dropped at vacant spots a couple of months before still waited to get the due attention – there always popped up something else, more pressing for urgent repair. 
But that was not our concern.
We were the Experimental Section by the Repair Shop Floor sited at the workbench next to the Foremen's nest.
We did not meddle with repair, our task was the implementation of the projects experimentally drawn at the Design Bureau by the Plant Management into the real-life metal.

A four-wheeled pull-cart, for example, or a stand ‘Glory to Labor!’ in front of the Main Check-Entrance to the Plant.
Or all kinds of bearing constructions made of channels: brackets, pillars, roof trusses.
But for so bulky products there was no room at the Shop Floor, we assembled them outside the gate on the stillage between the welder's booth and the window of the locker room. 

By the way, the parts of the city TV tower were also constructed on that stillage and the team from our Experimental Section assembled the whole tower at its site.
But that was before me...

I became a locksmith apprentice under the tutorship of Peter Khomenko with the apprenticeship stretch of three months.
For him, it was a good news because a locksmith got a certain increase in salary for the training of a newbie. 
On the other hand, he was not sure what to do with me, after he handed me a spare key from the tool compartment in the workbench under his vise so that I could keep there my hammer, chisel, and file received at the Tool Shop Floor. 
Okay, he showed me how to produce a scratcher out of thin steel wire to draw marks on an iron sheet but what then? 

In our row of vises, you could barely see a workman at work. 
Unless at the end of the working day when someone was hammering some ‘shabashka’ for household needs at his hutta.
Yet all the workforce were always busy.
A couple of locksmiths working with the welder at the stillage.
Some went to dismantle the roller table in the foundry.
Another group was led by the Senior Foreman to the Boiler Shop Floor to conduct installing of anchor bolts for a projected stationary telpher crane. 
In general, the work was running high.
Somewhere...

The Repair Shop Floor Managers worked in the office above the locker room.
It is true, the Shop Floor CEO, Lebedev, came there no more than two times a day.
Where he worked after leaving the office I had no idea.
He was wearing the railwayman black uniform overcoat.
In summer, of course, it was a jacket but still of the same uniform with silver-colored buttons.
At walking, his back was held so upright that it was not hard to guess: the man got well befogged.
And even if his front side could betray the fact of Lebedev’s being drunk as a fiddler, he never stumbled the slightest bit.
No, never.
The workers respected him, probably, because of he never stayed in the office for long.

Next, in the table of ranks were coming the Managers of the Sections by the Repair Shop Floor.
The Manager of the Repair Section – Mozgovoy. 
His thin falsetto somehow did not fit his plumpness, but he was also respected for being harmless. 
Once in the Repair Section, they were restoring the concavity profile of some bulky incomprehensible thing. 
No matter who you asked what the crap was that thing the answer was the same:
‘Who the fuck knows what hooey it is.’
With that ‘hooey’ pronounced long almost like a howl:
‘...hooooey it is.’

And so, for half a month, they kept scraping that concavity in turns.
Whoever got tired of doing nothing took the hand scraper and commenced to scrape. 
They brought it to a mirror shine so that another hooey (a convex one) began to freely enter and rotate back and forth inside the scrape one.
Mozgovoy, sure thing, was delighted by such a labor achievement at his Section.

Well, now, the locksmith Lekha from the Podlipnoye village, after his recent demobilization from the army, at the end of a working day put a chisel to the shiny surface of the polished hooey and with the hammer raised to his shoulder asked:
‘Well, so, Mozgovoy, d’you wanna me fuck the fucker?’
And Mozgovoy replied in a tired falsetto:
‘If you have no brains, go – fuck it.’
Lekha certainly was joking but Mozgovoy did not tell on him although he could...

Then the Manager of the Experimental Section, Lyonya… 
(...well, embarrassingly I cannot recollect his last name; I remember the mole on his upper lip but not the last name...)
About him, it was not clear yet: to respect or not to respect. 
He was still wet behind his ears and until recently had been sitting in the Foremen's nest by the locker room door.
Then he graduated something in absentia and got raised up to the Management Office.

Then came Engineer-Technologist, at the desk with his back to the window, but I don’t even remember his name.
And the Senior Foreman, Melai – Anatoly’s father.
He had a wide horizontal gash of a mouth and he was always silent, unlike his singsong son... 

Twice a month a cashier with a tarpaulin bag climbed up the stairway to the Management Office to mete out the advance or the monthly payment.
The very first time she gave me an advance of just twenty rubles.

When I had brought my first earnings home, then, before the arrival of Mother, I scattered all the twenty paper rubles on the couch in the kitchen – one by one, so that it would seem more. 
I said:
‘Mom, that’s for you to dispose of.’
And then I asked two rubles for cigarettes, without going into detail...

The working day began at eight in the morning.
We passed along the aisle of the still silent Mechanical Shop Floor to our locker room where along the three blind walls there stood tall plywood boxes of lockers and two more rows of them (back to back) divided the locker room into halves along the longitudinal axis. 
Each locker had two vertical compartments: one for the clean clothes and the other for the working dress, aka spetzovka, given to a worker once a year. 
From above, the two compartments were covered with a mutual shelf for a hat and the package with a midday meal.
But for a midday meal, I and Vladya went home during the break – over a stile in the concrete wall and in five minutes you're home. 

While we changed clothes and had a smoke in the locker room, the machines of the Mechanical Shop Floor started to turn on, one after another.
The howling, rapping, and rumbling of their engines merged with the squeal of the steel being scraped off.
The door slightly muffled the working day cacophony but then it got swung open and the Foreman, Borya Sakoon, drove us out to work, that was to the vises or to the stillage in the yard where we seemed to be as if busy with work.

The rest of the day Borya Sakoon spent sitting by the locker room door on a bench at the desk of Foremen's. 
He leaned on it with one elbow, then with the other and constantly smoked cigarettes ‘Prima'. 
Short, with thin hair and colorlessness in the face, he was simply a namesake of Vladya because both denied any kinship. 
Often fits of coughing made him pull his cap over his face and cough through it into the palm of his hand.
If that did not subdue the fit, he threw the cap onto the desk and went on coughing with his face dropped into it.
Then he with a jerk took another cigarette out from his pocket, lit it up and the cough eventually died down until the next attack.
Sometimes he rose from the desk to stretch his whole body – so small against the backdrop of the mad rambling of machines in the Mechanical Shop Floor, then he lit another cigarette and sat down again.

One time he beckoned me with a finger to sit on the opposite bench at the desk and shouting over the roaring howl of the machine tools began to tell how soon after the war he went to dances in the club of Podlipnoye and the village yobos started to bully him and he ran out of the club but they were chasing and he had to lie down in a ditch and shoot his Walter pistol from there and he also witnessed how the law enforcing bodies did away with the All-Union thief-in-law, handled Kushch, who came to Konotop but they were following him and in the Budyonny street just neared from behind and banged into the back of his head and in a second a ‘black raven' drove up and he, the young guy Borya at that time, was told to grab Kushch by the legs and help to heave the body into vehicle. 
‘And even now you can't buy anywhere a fabric like that in the Kushch's suit,' he shouted taking with his fingers a tobacco fiber from a cigarette ‘Prima' stuck to his lips. 

But Borya Sakoon did not always look so miserable and rotten.
One day Vladya called me to drop into the Loony to watch how our Foreman was dealing with the Ballet Group there.
In the hall on the second floor, a dozen girls held the handrail along the mirror wall and Borya walked along their line like a cock of karra in a short, diamond-shaped necktie. 
And demonstrating some move he shot his leg almost above his head.

The hardest time of the whole working day was the concluding half an hour. 
In those half an hour there was no time at all: it just stopped.
It’s better not to even look at that round electric clock above the window lattice in the transverse wall.
Some endless stretch of disappointment.
And you had an itch to push the frozen clock hand with a straw.

(...I have no idea why with a straw, but that's what I wanted at that time when there was no time, although I understood that the straw itself would break up instead of moving that iron piece of crap...) 

The machine tools in the Mechanical Shop Floor slowly fell silent, one after another. 
The locksmiths of the Experimental Section lined the workbench leaning their backs on their vises.
The two-meter-tall Mykola-the-old emptied his horse-long nose into a lump of a rag the color of earth-and-ash. 
Who could imagine he had a handkerchief!
Mykola-the-young pensively picked at fresh acne on his cheeks.
Tick!
Twenty-seven to five.

Swarthy-faced Yasha began to tell how the Red Army took him along after liberating Konotop from the Germans. 
A solitary ‘shabashka'-tinker at the grinding wheel in the corner did not interfere with the calm flow of Yasha's story. 
They ran to attack and ours supported them from behind shooting the ‘forty-fivers', and one of the supporting shells shot off the balls of one attacker. 
Yasha’s palm showed the trajectory of a flying 45-mm shell.
So he ran half a kilometer more before he died.

And, recollecting how I also felt nothing and only the ground jumped before my eyes as we ran to attack in Zarnitsa military game through the shaggy mist over the bumpy field, I believed Yasha.

He shifted the cap to the back of his head revealing the sharp, like an arrowhead, angle from which his black hair ran back under his cap.
Not a speckle of gray.
He looked twice as young as Borya Sakoon.
The foreman told that at the installation of the TV tower something went wrong with the uppermost section.
It was in winter with severe frost and Yasha took off his sheepskin coat, and climbed up by the cable and put it to rights. 

Mykola-the-old was two heads taller than Yasha.
They were sort of buddies and after work went home by the same diesel train, only to different stops.
Tick!
Seven to five.
Okay, that's that; time to go to change.

Skully also dropped out of the Railway Transportation Technical School and entered our Experimental Section. 
And that’s right. 
He got no scholarship there but after giving him a diploma they would send him to work no one knew where.
Who needed that?
So the three of the Orpheuses got together.
And Chuba worked in the Car Repair Shop Floor.
We sometimes ran into each other in the Plant.

And we continued to play dances even when Vladya smashed his finger with a hammer.
The Club paid each of us thirty-six rubles a month.
It seemed too little, but what could we do? 
When we started a talk with Pavel Mitrofanivich, he said they bought an electric guitar for one hundred and fifty rubles and as a result, he had no funds to increase our salary. 
The guitar, named ‘Iolanta', was certainly classy – so neat, and red and sounding miles better than those made by ‘The Radio' magazine leads. 

Soon the Club Director sent me along with the projectionist Konstantin Borisovich to the city of Chernigov to bring two more electric guitars from the local Music Factory: the bass and the rhythm ones.
Pavel Mitrofanovich talked to the Plant Management and I was exempted from work for two days, because of the long way to Chernigov.
There we stayed in a hotel overnight as business travelers and in the morning we arrived at the factory. 
Konstantin Borisovich went to talk with their Management and I had to wait for two hours.
Then they brought the guitars for me to check them – they hadn’t even had cases.
And they were much heavier than ‘Iolanta’, and covered with black lacquer.
It was clear that the factory hadn’t mastered yet the electric guitar production.
Though, when we brought them to Konotop, Chuba said that the bass guitar would do.

On the following Monday in the Shop Floor locker room, Vladya started agitating me and Skully to get an exemption from work for health reasons. 
He suggested going to the Plant Medical Center to complain about the sausage we ate the day before when playing at a wedding.
That sausage was certainly not fresh.
Only we had to go all together and say the same thing.

We found Chuba on the Car Repair Shop Floor and the four of us came to the First Aid facilities with the same complaint of the wedding sausage.
There they seated us on chairs along the wall and the nurse brought four tin bath basins with ears and put them on the floor in front of us – one for each of the ill Orpheuses.
She then brought a bucket of luke-warm water tinted with potassium permanganate. 
The doctor told us to drink it in liters and then poke two fingers in the mouth as deep as the root of the tongue – that would save us from the food poisoning.
The preparations for the stomach pumping worked on Chuba and Skully like a charm, their poisoning crises passed at once and they returned to their respective workplaces. 
But Vladya and I staunchly stayed until the end of the procedure and threw up everything into the basins that we had for breakfast that morning.
The doctor was impressed by our obstinacy and gave us exemption until the end of the current working day.
When we had changed and reached the Check-Entrance the midday beak began.
It turned out that for all our labors we got just four hours of freedom having to come back to the mill next morning again. 

The Club Director, Pavel Mitrofanovich, announced to us that the Club was buying the electric organ ‘Yonika’ and that Lyokha Kuzko would play it as the fifth Orpheus.

Lyokha had reddish and already thinning hair and sported a horseshoe-shaped mustache a-la the Pesnyary to compensate a severe fold in his nose after some old-times fight. 
Because of that disfigured nose, he had been handled Rhinoceros. 
He was seven years older than us but he was a real guy.
He invited me and Vladya to his home to listen to the Beatles White Album copied to the tape-recorder. 
His father, Anatoly Efimovich Kuzko, had the yard of his fatherly hutta a two-story red brick house built for Rhinoceros.
On the first floor, there was a garage with a gate of sheet iron and two rooms and a kitchen on the second floor. 
Some folks could live, anyway.
But his Dad did not buy Lyokha a car because he was drinking like a fish. 
That’s why his wife Tatyana had left him taking their baby daughter away.

Along with the Beatles' White Album Lyokha also shared ‘The Forensic Medicine Textbook' to look through. 
The yellowish pages contained lots of black and white photographs with explanatory text under them. 
But then Lyokha opened his favorite spot in the textbook at the page with dozens of small sized pictures (as for a passport) rows of them demonstrating the difference between intact and damaged hymens.

(...perhaps because of that textbook the pornographic publications make me recoil. 
I really feel scared – what if now, turning a page in ‘The Playboy' I’ll run into the murder with the use of household scissors sticking up into my face or else a guy strangled on a wooden stool, who knows?.) 

For the midday meal, we went home over the concrete wall – a real shortcut for no less than half a kilometer compared with going through the Plant Check-Entrance. 
Having warm up the soup or vermicelli on the kerogas in the veranda, I took the meal to the kitchen and there took off my spetzovka pants and jacket remaining in the underpants and the tank top. 
It made no difference because I was home alone with the parents at work and the younger ones at their Technical School.
The reason for taking off my working clothes was those ten minutes before going back to the Plant.
Sitting in dirty spetzovka on the couch or in the armchair was not right.

In those ten minutes, I played the guitar and screamed different song for developing my vocal skills which I did not and do not have. 
But I sang all the same – may Beata Tyszkiievich, a professional Polish beauty from a color magazine pinned above the couch together with the black and white photo of the group ‘The Who' forgive me. 
Once my roaring resulted in a boner and I, grabbing a ruler left behind by the Technical School students on the desk under the window, measured my dick. 

The locksmithery inoculates respect for the detailed knowledge...

One day, returning from the midday break we, Vladya and I, saw Skully sitting in the nest of Foremen's nest next to Borya Sakoon and an unfamiliar man in clean clothes.
‘Here they’re coming’ said the foreman and the stranger invited us and Skully as well to go along with him.
We followed his athletic figure in a tartan shirt.
It was a hot October day and we three wore just T-shirts with no spetzovka jackets on
From the farewell grimace of Borya Sakoon, we guessed that we were led by a representative of law-enforcing bodies, but had no idea why. 

From the Main Check-Entrance, the latecomers were walking from the canteen in the square beyond the gate. 
Everything went as usual and only we were pulled out from the routine life of the Plant and separated from it.
‘Where to, smarties?’ asked Peter Khomenko with a smile from the counter-directed stream of the workmen, but noticing the man in clean ahead of us who turned back with a jerk, Peter dropped all his cheerfulness at once and paced away towards the Shop Floor without waiting for an answer.
‘Who’s that?’ alertly asked the escort.
I replied that was my tutor and we left the Plant through the Main Check-Entrance. 

He told us to get into the ‘Volga’ where Chuba could be already seen through the glass of the windshield and the car drove to the Militia City Department, which was next to the Passport Bureau.
Behind the gate of the Militia City Department, there was a wide yard-coral bordered with one-story buildings of barrack type. 
We were separated and led to different offices in the different buildings where they began to ask us questions and write down our responses. 

Of course, not everything in the proceeding had been recorded.
For instance, the interrogation of Skully began as follows:
‘Do you know that fucking moron?' 
‘Which fucking moron?’
‘The one who brought you here.’
‘No, I don’t know him.’
‘This is the Head of the Criminal Investigation Department.’
‘No, I do not know him.’

And I was interrogated by that… well, Head of the Criminal Investigation Department.
Seated at the large desk, muscular, with the hair sticking closely to his skull he asked who the day before was present at the rehearsal in the Variety Ensemble room in the Club.
And who was the last to leave? 
Who was approaching the closet where so expensive German Accordion with four registers was kept?
He kept writing all the time and when the phone on his desk rang, he pressed the receiver to his ear with the shoulder, like Marlon Brando in the movie where he was the sheriff.
After interrogating all of us they said we were free and could return to our workplace.

We sauntered up along the street to the Department Store and turned left to the Peace Square. 
Four Orpheuses in smeared spetzovka pants and old faded T-shirts.
Along the Peace Avenue, we also strolled not hurrying – the working day was ending at five. 
At the Zelenchuk area, we had a bit of fun jumping at each other like Mazandaran tigers and tearing down the worn T-shirts on our bodies. 
We did not stop it until all the four T-shirts were torn apart from their collars to the waist. 
So what?
The day was sunny and pretty warm.
Then we tied the tatters with knots upon our navels and went, like hippies, on.
And it was Skully who had started the horseplay.
Probably, because of he had such a hairy chest. 

Next week, on my way to the Plant after the midday break I, as always, called into Vladya's hutta. 
One of his neighbor’s hens had died in the yard that day and Vladya suggested taking her with us to hang in our locker room.
Just for fun.
The plan did not inspire me too much but I still helped Vladya to smuggle the demised to the Plant.
For mounting the wall along the Professions Street you needed your hands and if dragging a newspaper parcel with a hen you had nothing to grab hold of those holes in the concrete slabs with.

In the center of the locker room ceiling there hung a length of wire for the light bulb which was missing together with its cartridge. 
Vladya took someone’s unfinished ‘shabashka’ from under the window, rested it on the middle row of the lockers, climbed on top and wrapped the unemployed wire around the hen’s neck.
She froze up there with her dirty white wings loosely spread over the bony dead legs.

The midday break was over and the machine tools in the Mechanical Shop Floor started their scraping wails when the black-haired fatty locksmith from the Repair Section entered the room. 
Seeing the lifeless bird he did not laugh but left immediately.
In a second our foreman, Borya Sakoon, flew in. 
With his eyebrows shot up and the moth in the form of the small letter ‘o’ he stood a moment or two considering the listless animal from his uplifted face.
Then he turned to us:
‘Hairy-yobbos! Bitches! You did it!’
For some unadvertised reason, Borya was in the habit of calling the Orpheuses working at the Experimental Section ‘hairy-yobbos'. 
We certainly denied the allegation but Vladya took the dead bird off, wrapped back into the same newspaper and dropped it somewhere outside of the Shop Floor. 

In the final analysis, Borya was right – with just two eyewitnesses by the end of the working day the entire Repair Shop Floor knew that the hairy-yobbos (the working mass slavishly aped the foreman's example in calling us that name) fixed a chicken in the locker room. 
And if the thing remained there for at least half an hour that would inevitably give the start for indistinct rumors circulating in Konotop that at the KaPeVeRrZe Plant they had hanged someone in the locker room... 

Olga and I ceased dating at the gate of her aunt’s hutta.
We found a more suitable place, or, rather, she showed it to me.
A little further along the Budyonny Street, there was a short dead end to the left coming to the closed iron gate of the Oil Storage Base. 
Near the gate, along with the roadside fence there stood a park bench. 
Who and when had dragged it there I couldn’t say but it occupied a strategically right place remaining in the shadow not penetrated with the light from the lamp above the gate.

There I got acquainted in absentia with Olga’s Konotop relatives.
The sister of her mother, Nina, immediately after the war served as a telephone operator at the headquarters of some Soviet Army division stationed in Poland.
After she was demobilized she didn’t return to the Soviet Union because she had married a Pole and they had got a child already, so Nina stayed to live among the Poles.
Four years later she arrived in Konotop to attend the funeral of one of her parents.
That was a mistake.
They never let her go back despite the fact that her young daughter remained in Poland and the country itself was a member of the Socialist Camp Community.
She never knew what happened in the life of her daughter or husband because none of her letters was replied. 

Fifteen years later Aunt Nina registered her marriage with Uncle Kolya who did not drink and had a good job in the forestry only he often needed to go somewhere by his motorcycle with a stroller. 
But he had built a really good hutta of three rooms and a kitchen.
They had no children and adopted a girl.
She was being very fond of and named Olya.
Recently they bought a piano for her although it’s probably too late to start at eleven.

Aunt Nina worked at the Meat-Packing Plant in three shifts.
To reach her workplace she had to walk two kilometers along the railway tracks.
On the other hand, they do not have to buy meat at the Bazaar. 
At the Meat-Packing Plant, they checked the bags of the workers going out through the Check-Entrance after their shift but they did not look into the women panties. 

And on that same bench, we talked about Art. 
For example, we discussed there the film ‘Romeo and Juliet’ after a joint watching it in the basement cinema of the Loony.
‘I could not make out what they were talking about but the tears dripped all the same as if I was some fool...' 

(...a very well-defined assessment, by the by, the rhymed and metered speech makes even words you know too obscure to get it that a lot of noble ladies in Verona, younger than you, had babies at your age…) 

And it was there (I’m still on the bench) that Olga really harpooned me up securely and for long.
She uttered just one phrase but if you’re a born patsy-graphomaniac you’re hooked alright.
‘Yesterday I entered in my diary – “when he kissed me goodbye I was immensely happy.”
Damn it! You're done for! And forever!
Firstly, in many tons of the read and re-read literature, I had never come across such an expression ‘immensely happy'. 
Secondly, she kept a diary!
Thirdly, but not lastly, I was there in that diary!!!

After the dances, we sometimes escorted her girlfriend Sveta to the porch of Sveta's hutta. 
At so late a time the Konotopers who live in huttas did not venture into their yards, more so Sveta's Granny and Grandpa. 
After giggling by our side for a stretch of a cigarette Sveta went into to bed and the porch with the narrow plank of a bench along its plank-paneled sides remained at our disposal.

On one of such evenings, Olga told me to wait on that porch while she'd be gone to her hutta because Aunt Nina was on the third shift that day and Uncle Kolya had gone by his motorcycle somewhere in the District. 

It took a long time until I heard the tinkle of the wicket handle-latch in the neighboring yard behind departing aunt Nina.
A few minutes later Olga came and silently beckoned me to follow her.
We went out into the back-alley and noiselessly entered the yard of her hutta. 

The door from the veranda led to a large kitchen with an even larger living room to the right and a bedroom to the left both separated from the kitchen with cloth curtains in their doorways.
After the living room, there was another bedroom for Olga and small Olya. 
We did not go there but turned into the owners’ bedroom to the left.

Olga switched on the feeble nightlight and went to the bedroom behind the living room.

I was left alone with the glistening nickel-plated backs of a large double bed of a ceremonial appearance and with a smaller more casual one next to the curtains of the doorway to the kitchen.
I was numb with the mute tension.

Olga returned in a dressing robe keeping its unbuttoned sides in place with her folded arms.
Not saying a word we both looked at the smaller bed and Olga put out the night light.
Under the robe, she had only panties on. 

I hastened to follow the suit and remained in just underpants.
Then followed a long silent battle for each of the sleeves of her dressing gown.
Finally, I threw the whole item on a chair by the wall, the score of the clothes we had on was reduced to a draw: ‘ 1 : 1 '. 
When I turned to her, she lay on her back covered up to her chest shielded with tightly pressed arms over it.
It was chilly indeed in the room and I got under the covers too.

The bustle about her small panties was no less than with the large dressing gown.
And there we were both naked at last.
It's really hot under those covers. 
And then…

Then she writhed furiously under me pushing my hands away.
I could only rub my dick between her thighs and against the tiny turf of hair without knowing what was what but feeling just a little more and…
Now, almost… about…
Damn, she turned off again!. 

(...I would do it, I swear I would, if not for the lack of time.
That night the cuckoo in the kitchen cuckoo clock went crazy and jumped out with her shrill ‘coo! coo!’ every other two minutes and now it was already croaking six and Olya would be getting up to get ready for school and it was time for me to dress up and go away, quick, before Aunt Nina came back…)

Of course, that night we allowed ourselves way too much.
We had gone too far and there remained no fail-safe for us.
Hugs and kisses by the hutta's wicket or on Sveta’s porch were not enough and wouldn’t do.
But where?
And when?

On the seventh of November, Olga said, after young Olya would have passed in the demonstration together with her school, Uncle Kolya would take her and Aunt Nina to his village.
And that time Olga wouldn’t wriggle away,
Cuckoo’s cries would mean nothing.
The whole night would be ours…

In the morning of November 7, I came after her, we also were going out in the festive city.
She was retouching with a pencil her trimmed thread-thin brows, marking the corners of her eyes.
Spiffing up, in short.
We were alone, but when I reached out with my arms she didn't respond with her body and said, 
‘Why? The hutta is ours today. But only… You know, there’s something...’

I froze in mortification. Could it be she's going announce she had menstruation? 

Well, in general, if I wanted it to be, well, I know what, then I had to agree to one condition… 
‘What?! Speak out!’
Now, before going out to the city she would make up my eyes.
What the fuck?!.
Though, if you think about it, that’s better than menstruation.

Hercules would understand me.
He—the winner in fights with the Nemean Lion, the Lernean Hydra, the Cretan Bull and other monsters—was made (by a chick named Omphal)  wear a woman dress and spin yarn in a gynoecium, with her high heel put on his male dignity's throat. 
At least in some way, I'd be equal to that inhumanly powerful demigod. 
And I agreed…

Blue eyeshadows were put on my eyelids, black eyeliner left a wide line along the lashes…
And out we went to the city.

(...now, after all those ‘blue' and ‘pink' revolutions, after knighting of Elton John, after the charming cutie pirate Jack Sparrow people became more intelligent. 
In those days they needed two or even three glances to guess what actually was wrong with my visage.
Then someone shrugged, another one giggled…)

Borya Sakoon, who came out of his five-story block in the Zelenchuk area cheerfully greeted me but having looked more closely suddenly changed in his face. 
Genuine fright distorted the worn out facial features of the foreman, the unfinished ‘hairy yo...’ stuck in his throat and he fled back to the block of his residence.

(...and that was the man who survived the rampant banditry and all kinds of ‘black cat’ gangs in the post-war Konotop!
Or maybe because of that?..)

‘You are sick in your head and fleeing the treatment,’ concluded my younger sister Natasha flatly when meeting us on the sidewalk of the Peace Avenue.

‘...but I don’t care
  ‘cause of my boner...’

In the Central Park Olga took out her cosmetic bag and washed out my War Paint.
Enough for pretending a Hercules.
Then the Skully’s girlfriend Nina with her girlfriend Ira came up to us and the three girls went away looking for a place to have a smoke.

A group of guys from the Settlement approached me.
They were celebrating in full swing already.
They felt elated.
They wanted that an Orpheus from the Settlement was also nyshtyak.
They tore off the lid from an intact bottle and handed it to me.
Everything in this life had to be paid for, even your popularity.
I raised the bottle up, threw back my head, cast the parting look at the sun and started drinking from the bottle's neck. 
Then the bottle went around in the circle.
Then we went to a grocery store for more wine.
Then I felt sick and went home.

I woke up in the lean-to on the iron bed which substituted for ‘Jawa’ after the Arkhipenkos moved to their apartment.
My ‘dacha' season had already passed but the bed still remained in the lean-to and chanced to be so helpful. 
I woke up with my raincoat and shoes on but the naked iron mesh of the bed didn't mind. 
The main thing was that I hadn't overslept. 
That day we were playing farewell dances in the Park.
Only I still had to trudge all the way there being so stiff and with that oily smack in my dried mouth and—ouch!—with that pain in the nape...

I finally came there when everyone was dragging already the equipment to the Dance-Floor stage.
Lyokha started to carp that I was dodging and Olga too went to attack:
‘Where did you get lost?' 
I hardly could explain that I was very sick and Lyokha said all that I needed was a good drink to get okay.

I shuddered at just the thought of it but Lyokha and Olga began to laugh. 
Yurko – the one with the appearance of a boy that Olga kept as her adjutant, ran to a nearby store and brought wine.
I forced myself to take a few gulps and—lo!—I was alive again.
It worked like a charm...

After the dances were over and the equipment dragged back to the ticket office, Olga and I left the Park and in two minutes of tense walking reached her back-alley.
One hutta, two – the one of Sveta's, the third was for us. 
I assuredly walked Olga to the wicket opened it and she, all of a sudden, recoiled… 

By age, I was two years older than Olga but, to me, it always seemed another way around. 
She knew more than I from all the stuff I had read in books.
And she had authority.
Whenever one of the girlfriend in our bohemian environment had problems with outsiders, she turned to Olga for help. 
Olga walked out with the brazen and put that stupid cow in her proper place...

It was a rare evening when the dances went off without fighting.

A multi-voiced discordant squeal rose suddenly from the Dance Floor yet absolutely not in time with the number we were playing.
In the dense mass of the youth gathered for collective recreation a circle of free space formed in no time dimmed with the rapid gusts of fists milling the air.
The vortex of the circle tornadoed fast across the Dance Floor, accompanied with shrieks of girls giving way to it.
We stopped playing and encouraged dear friends to keep order.
The defeated side, alone or in the ring of his buddies, was pushing through to the exit.
To remove the low depressing hum Skully set the tempo with dry knocks of sticks against each other and we started the next number... 

Girls did not make a show of their dissent and for their cat-fights invited each other to go out. 
Olga went out a couple of times and became an authority because in Theodosia she had started dances-going at the age of thirteen and without wasting time on empty talks finished them off in a business-like manner. 
As a result, if some frostbitten bitch hurt feelings of a girl from the bohemian circle, the mention of Olga's name made her realize her blunder and she shut up. 

And Olga also seemed older because of attentive attitude towards her from mujiks.

Once after the dances when we collected the wires and cables on the stage, a frightened guy ran into the Dance Floor, crossed it and jumped over the fence into the Park. 
At the last moment, the pursuer, a hairy ass mujik over thirty, managed to deal a glancing strike and the fugitive fell awkwardly into the bushes, but leaped up at once and ran away. 
‘I’ll catch you, bitch!’ cried the triumphant and turning to Olga standing by the stage added,
‘Ain’t it, Ruddy?’
‘You yourself is the word,’ Olga answered diplomatically and the latter left the Dance Floor with a swagger.

That’s why I felt so much younger than her.
But the moment she flinched at the wicket of the dark hutta that feeling disappeared and everything fell into place. 
Next to her fear, I felt older and stronger than her. 
I felt pity for her and compassion.
After all, the younger ones should be shielded and protected.
Even from ourselves.
I comforted the frightened girl and left without entering the yard.

On my way to the Nezhin Street I knew that I had done the righteous thing and was pleased with myself, yet all the same I couldn’t but agree with the diagnosis put by my sister Natasha – ‘sick in my head and fleeing the treatment’...

On November 7, the unusually long Indian summer ended and we moved to the Club to play dances there.
The Hall of the Ballet Studio on the second floor opposite the cinema auditorium stretched for some forty meters from the door to the small stage at the far end wall.
The stage was intended not for concerts but for Evenings of Recreation and therefore could be climbed in two steps over the couple of its all-width stairs. 
That way a recreating participant could ascend there when called by the mass-entertainer to take part in some funny competition or another event of the Evening. 

The stage took the central one-third of Hall's width and was continued on both sides with vertical gratings of smooth rebars coated with black paint. 
Light cloth curtains hung behind the gratings forming a kind of backstage.
Above the center of the Hall, midst the roof bearing structures painted with the black Kuzbass-Lacquer, a large white ball was fixed covered with mirror shards.
When the ball, got rotated with its electric motor in the beam of a searchlight, polygonal light spots were floating along the walls and the floor of the Hall.
The longitudinal walls consisted mainly of windows under which the handrail for students of the ballet art was stretching over the whole Hall.
The wall opposite the stage consisted, as it’s proper for ballet schools, of tightly fitted mirrors.
The Hall was an ideal place for any gathering – from the New Year matinees for the Settlement kids to the School Graduating Parties, the Evenings of the Plant Youth Recreation and, the last but not least, for dances.

And those dances also discovered the weak spot in the ideal – its floor.
The floor had the coat of red paint which under the soles of a couple hundred dancers turned into fine dust and peeled off in less than a month.
However, the Club Director, Pavel Mitrofanovich, said it did not matter.

Behind the curtains on both sides of the stage there stood the huge load speakers from the summer cinema in the Park and they produce such a bomb sound – nyshtyak! 
Our distant figures with guitars mirrored in the wall on the other end of Hall over the rhythmic swaying of the dancers' heads in the dimly lighted void with the swimming specks from the ball – around, and round, and round – and everything went on really nyshtyak. 

And only Chuba puffed and complained that the sound of his bass guitar from two black portable loudspeakers on the stage was completely lost behind the mighty boxes with the meter-wide speakers.
Lyokha said he knew a guy who had low-frequency speakers for bass and we only had to procure material for a box to install them.
And he also suggested the place to seek the needed material – The KaPeVeRrZe Plant.
After all, all we needed was a sheet of thick plywood three by two meters.

We, the Plant affiliated Orpheuses, started to mull over a plan.
There was no plywood on the Repair Shop Floor, where everything we dealt with was iron and steel.
The right place to look for plywood was the Car Repairing Shop Floor where Chuba worked.
And he said, yes, the plywood could be extracted from the cars brought for repair, but how to get it out from the Plant? 

He declined the proposal to cut the plywood in size of the bass box parts and drop them over the wall in the Professions Street.
His master would at once ask unnecessary questions – where from was so immodest quantity of such an expensive material? 
There remained just one option: to get the whole sheet out of the Plant through the Club building with its never closed side door to the Plant grounds, next to the bill painters room.
However, the plan had some slippery point – the Car Repair Shop Floor and the Club were located at the opposite ends of the Plant.
Dragging the whole sheet through the whole Plant?
Chuba refused to take such a risk.
Skully also was not too enthusiastic.
As always, the hardest part rested entirely on my and Vladya’s shoulders...

Well, to tell the truth, not quite entirely because Chuba still ripped off the plywood in a car and forgot to lock its door when leaving, as it was required by the rules.

Through that door, I and Vladya penetrated the car and in the indicated place found the desired treasure – a standard sheet of thirty-millimeter-thick plywood. 
It had a couple of stains but that did not matter at all.

We dragged the plywood out of the car and, grabbing from the edges, carried it along the gravel of the track ballast shoulder, then along the asphalt paths between the Shop Floors.
On our way, we kept persuading each other that the sheet was not too dreadfully heavy and that there was nothing special if two workmen carried it within the Plant between the Shop Floors. 
Although we personally had never observed such a picture.
Avtokars were a usual means of transportation for such purposes. 

When to the Club there remained the smaller leg – to pass by the Smithy Shop Floor, the All-Plant Bathhouse, the Fire Brigade building, the Oxygen Tank Filling Station and the Medical Center – Skully ran up from the Mechanical Shop Floor to inform that Borya Sakoon sent after us and if we didn’t show up we would be fired.
That was something new, Borya never threw threats to the tune like that.
Could the Criminal Investigation Department Head come back again?

We rested the sheet against the smoky wall Of the Smithy Shop Floor under the marble tablet screwed to the bricks announcing that in 1967, on the fifties anniversary of the Soviet Power there was embedded a message to the KaPeVeRrZe Plant workers who would work there in the year of centennial anniversary of the October Revolution.
Making sure that our sheet did not interfere with the traffic, we went to the Repair Shop Floor.

Borya was raging more furiously than Fantômas – where had we been paddling when the whole Experimental Section was sent to ‘harvesting’?

Yes, harvesting was not a joke.
It was like parading the entire workforce of the Experimental Section.
That was the moment when everyone was really busy.

All the locksmiths from the Experimental Section, in full collection, with a piece of paper naming the material and the needed quantity of it started for the Central Warehouse.
There, behind the All-Plant Bathhouse heaps of rebars of different diameter, by heaps of metal fittings of powerful profiles, by heaps of pipes with a section of no less than ten centimeters were piled along the tracks. 
Then a stocky railway crane would approach along the tracks and hover its beam with hanging steel cables over the tangled heaps and hills of all those piles of metal. 
Two of the most experienced workers equipped with steely breakers would noose the pipes, rebars or channels named in the paper.
The rest would share their advice standing at a safe distance.
The crane with scraping screech would pull the trapped metal out from the heap of iron messed up with the previous ‘harvestings' and lower it onto the waiting autokar. 
The Ware House employee would check the approximate amount of the cargo with the figure indicated in the order and give his ‘okay’.
The driver would return to the autokar from the safe distance and drive it to the Shop Floor scraping the asphalt of the paths with dangling ends of rebars, or pipes or whatever was there in the order.
The locksmiths of the Experimental Section would return to the Shop Floor as a monolithic cheerful crowd proud of the fulfilled duty...

And now the returning locksmiths emerged from the Mechanical Shop Floor aisle but we were not among them.
We failed to attend the holy rite of harvesting.
It was good that Vladya, having the same last name as the foreman, had a special nickname approach to the latter and we again disappeared from the Experimental Section. 

We returned to our sheet under the memorial tablet.
The Manager of the Repair Section by our Shop Floor, Mozgovoy, stood by it and, eyeing the plywood, swallowed his saliva. 
Of course, such a material would whet anyone’s appetite.
We grabbed our prey.
‘Where are you taking it?’ asked Mozgovoy in a wistful falsetto.
‘To the Plant Management,’ casually replied Vladya and we dragged the sheet in the Main Check-Entrance direction twenty meters to the right of which the Club building continued the wall surrounding the Plant.
The side door, sure thing, was not locked.

We dragged the sheet in and leaned it against the bunch of billboards opposite the painters’ room...

When after work we came to the Club to move the plywood to our room the crisp-curled House Manager, Stepan was already wheeling round and about our sheet.
The deficient material would entice anyone into improper planning even a do-nothing who in all of his life did not hold anything heavier than the bunch of keys in his hands. 

It’s not about Stepan, though, he’d been a good carpenter they said.
It’s about the Club Director who stood by and tinkled his personal bunch of keys hallooing Stepan to our trophy.
Don't rub soap to your cheeks, Pavel Mitrofanovich, no shaving for you today, as a winged Settlement saying runs... 

The winter broke out somehow at once.
The snowdrifts pile up as if they always were there...

I went after Olga before the dances.
She introduced me to everyone in the hutta.
I was urged to take my coat off and sit down and have a drink, but, no, thank you I had to work that evening it’s time for us to leave.
Olga got dressed and we left.

However, it was a bit early for the Club because we didn’t move the equipment from the stage and only locked the Hall after the dances.
With that time reserve, we paid a visit to the bench near the Oil Storage Base. 
She had a bottle of wine in her bag and we drank it.
Not too much, just to warm up and get in the mood. 
And then we went to the Club along the tight snow crust pressed to the road with the traffic tires and the pedestrians' footwear soles. 

Already at night, dark and moonless, but with bright pricks of the star specks in the sky, we returned to the unfinished bottle of red wide stacked away in an inconspicuous snow drift.
It turned out to be so cold that it did not warm at all and it tasted like ice too.
We drank but did not emptied the bottle and lit our cigarettes.

I unbuttoned my coat, she unbuttoned hers and sat down in my lap.
We already were treating each other as our personal property.
I might run my hand into her pantyhose up to the convex concavity I had not find on that too short a night. 
She could casually unfasten my trousers belt and unbutton the fly to grasp my boner.
Everything was, as usual, blended with long, like a protracted dive into another dimension, kisses. 

And suddenly something happened and I was gone. 
Out of myself… and merging with… the fusion firmer with each push… no I anymore just we… we, we, we and nothing else… unmakeoutable… doesn't matter… and all's swimming… the fog… what's that?. What?. Oh, no!. More!. 

The connection was lost.
The night slowly emerged from nowhere, the snow, the bench was back again… 
A couple of jerks after the elusive new world showed there was nothing to keep, to return, to continue with...

We broke apart.
Again she and I.
I stood up, deafened.
The same lamp from up its post. 
Sparks in the snow drifts.
The black sky.
The star specks...
When no one can think at all…
Where’s my hat?
Okay, it can wait… 
November 17…
17 years old locksmith apprentice…
lost his virginity…
And she?

(...I do not know until now.
It does not matter.
Who cares?..)

Saying goodbye to her, so novelly quiet, by the hutta of her aunt, I realized that from now on it was my duty to be stronger than she and I did not have to understand anything else, from now and forever and ever.  

(...here! Here!
I can beautifully formulate thoughts after all.
Subsequently.
Decades later...)


The next evening I went to the Evening School of the Working Youth.
Olga sometimes attended classes there because Aunt Nina pressed her to get the paper about finishing eighth grade.
I had to wait for the end of a lesson after which she left with me. 
I saw Olga to her aunt's hutta and on the way, she told me how profuse the bleeding had been. 

(...as if it’s changing anything.
What's the point in all the maidenheads, circumcisions, adulteries and faithfulness forever and a day? 
What was – will be there no more.
What is – will be lost.
What is to be – can’t be avoided…)

Our love affair was not, of course, able to melt the snow and ice of winter but all the winter ice and snow could not quench our flaming ardor. 
And we fanned the flame at the least opportunity.

The snow-covered bench by the Oil Storage Base was soon rejected because of its odd backrest. 
The sheet iron trailer by the tiny ice rink in the Park was more spacious but it took a long time waiting until the guys would finish their wine, show off how smart they were, deal a punch each others mug (yet without drawing a knife out) and finally disperse.

Drawing the knife out one could just as well kiss it goodbye if Kolyan was around.
He’d take it away and never return.

Kolyan of Settlement was a representative of the increasingly rare breed of heroes.
Not too large an exemplar, he was only one meter and eighty and very laconic.
On the other hand, he didn’t really need to flash eloquence – look at those fists about twenty kilos each and any wish for odd discussions extinguished by itself.
Even for a dumbo clapped with a sack on his head from around the corner it was clear at once that Kolyan would make a toast of him in less than six seconds.
Among the guys, of course, he could say something only you had to patiently wait till his word would be out.

He took me for a champion in my special line since the day of our ‘engagement’ with Olga.

At that time she and I had just started dating.
That evening before going to the Park I asked my sister for her ring to put it on my little finger.
A commonplace fake jewelry with an embedded speck of glass.
She did not want to give it and I had to coax for her lending it just one that time. 

In the Park Olga and I went up to the summer cinema projectionists’ booth – the second projectionist, Grisha Zaychenko, gave me the key to its door.
The moment Olga saw the ring on my little finger she clung like a leaf from steambath twig-bunch – who's that from?
Borrowed from Kiddy, said I, my sister.
Olga refused to believe and asked to give it her for a close look.
I passed the ring and she at once clapped it on her finger, not the little one though.
Okay, said I, enough for showing off and give it back for I had promised Natasha to return, it’s from her boyfriend.
Olga tried to take it off but – no go! 
She swerved and pulled and spat at it – the ring sat tight and that’s it.
It was some torture cell session until she somehow managed to force it over her finger joint. 

When at last I shoved the cursed ring into my pocket we were not fit for dating – Olga’s finger hurt and I felt sorry for her.
So I locked the booth and we left.
And Kolyan at that time was picking up steam in the ticket office together with the Park watchman and he saw who it was coming down from above.
And what else could he have thought if from the booth portholes for half an hour the female moans were floating over entire summer cinema? 
‘Oh, my! Mmmm! Ouu! Ay!’
So he kinda thought: where, in such a small thing as I ...well, could it… sort of…  be sitting? 
So he respected me as a bro hero only from another field.

And in the sheet iron trailer, after the yobbo louts would close their debates that it was time to kick the ass of the hippies from the Peace Square that had become too hippy lately and leave happy of being so cool goons, we still had to wait until Kolyan concluded his explanations where… well… to... kinda put… the key… well… of... sort of… the trailer. 

The warmest feelings were left by the long sheepskin coat of Aunt Nina in which Olga once emerged from the hutta’s wicket.
We descended into the snow-filled Grove with the patches of smooth hard ice of the frozen Swamp and it was good, but, as always, not enough...

At the Plant, the term of our apprenticeship expired and we began to get the payment of seventy rubles a month – almost as much as other locksmiths. 
And cutting the iron with a chisel we no longer bruised our fingers with the hammer and we (the hairy yobbos) were even trusted with the manufacture of an experimental product from scratch. 
It’s interesting.

The intangible speculative thought turns into visual lines of drawings specked with countless figures of measurements.
Following those figures, we ask the gas welder to cut the necessary pieces out from 20 mm thick sheet iron, ask the marker to delineate the contours, ask the planer to scratch odd metal off to the markings, ask the welder to weld this one to that and that to another… 
Why so many requests?
Well, because everyone’s busy, sort of…
Sometimes from the request to its execution, it took weeks of waiting or go and ask again… 

And now the skeleton of the product on the stillage begins to grow with assembled parts and look like something.
The foreman ceases to call us ‘heary yobbos' every other minute and the locksmiths not so readily giggle about the launching of our ‘Lunokhod-2', aka Lunar Rover. 
The Experimental Section Manager demands to deliver the already thoroughly-stained cardboard folder with the pack of drawings and passes it to Yasha and Mykola-the-old for the more skilled workmen to bring the disembodied idea to its final tangibility. 
It hurts.

And the next product we ruined.
We spent a lot of material, assembled it and call Borya Sakoon to assess the work.
He looked through the drawings and said something was wrong.
And the Engineer-Technologist from the Shop Floor Management Office above the locker room agreed with him – yes, something’s not right.
Yet no one of them could tell what exactly was ‘not the thing' with all the measurements observed. 
They called the author of the project from the Design Bureau at the Plant Management. 
Even for him, it took some time to guess the reason. 
His idea was presented in metal Okay except for being a mirrored reflection of the drawings.
The product was cut to pieces...

After the New Year, a business trip team was sent from our Experimental Section to the village of Semyanovka to the construction site of a feed mill.
The team was composed of Foreman, Borya Sakoon, and locksmiths – Mykola-the young, Vasya, and me.
The first morning when we left to Semyanovka under the canvas top of a Plant, there was terrible ice on the roads.
The driver drove slowly so as not to slide and follow the fate of the vehicles, whose drivers had lost the control on the ice and that loomed now through the dense fog with their wheels up on the roadside.
And no one around, just silent fog.
Some panorama of the concluding stage in the Stalingrad Battle for you.

The feed mill was a gray building of three sections, half a kilometer off the village.
A silent chilly field of weather-beaten snow surrounded it from all the sides.
The boiler room did not work, we had to bore the wall yet with breakers to lay pipes through.
Frosty iron sides of numb bunkers and mute conveyor-belts filled the other half-dark section.
For two weeks we went there to knock iron against iron, perforating walls, pulling the conveyor belts up and dozing over the red-hot electrical spiral in the boiler room. 
While at one of those snoozes, a sharp prick of awl pierced my brain. 
I started up to hear Vasya’s gleeful laughter from his satisfied snout and see a piece of smoldering cotton on the floor.
That bitter smoke had penetrated through my nostrils to the brain. 
The foreman and Mykola laughed too but not as gladly as Vasya.
A thirty-year-old stupid dickhead... 

One time Mykola brought raw potatoes from a solitary clamp in the field.
We decided to bake them just to do something.
Borya sent me to collect crashed board pieces left in the building after construction works.
Mykola and Vasya found some straw to kindle the bonfire with the firewood I brought to the unfinished weigh-bridge section.
The gate, with one of its wings removed from the hinges, did not ward off the wind and, breaking in, it swerved the smoke from side to side.
We stood around the fire in the chilly wind blowing from the white field under the gray sky and the foreman, addressing Mykola, said,
‘In four years I will retire but this latata would not get ready yet.’
He threw the ‘Prima' stub into the fire and went into the corner to blind the area with a crackling electrode of the electric welding... 

What a beautiful word ‘latata’ I have never heard anyone calling potatoes that way.
Now Borya is playing with the electric welding. 
Vasya holds the pipe pieces for him to weld.
Mykola snuffs the smoke from the lazy fire.
What to busy me with?.

I took the piece of chalk that we brought with us for marking pipe-lengths to be cut up and started a drawing on the gate wing leaned against its shut counterpart. 
I tried as best as I could.
 
Perhaps that was the most successful drawing in my entire life, almost of natural dimensions. 
Nu, of course.
Hips, breasts, long hair falling behind the back, an appetizing triangle and tempting call in the look from under partly lowered eyelids.
Wow! Nothing to add to or remove from.
And the piece of chalk had not been finished off yet.
So, I used it for block letters next to the stark naked beauty.
‘BORYA, I AM WAITING FOR YOU!!’
Then I went to the fire, because of the wind had chilled the feet of the artist engulfed with his creative work. 
Mykola stood there too and giggled looking at the gate wing.

At that moment, Borya Sakoon took his face out of the black box of the welder's mask and followed Mykola's gaze at the gate. 
No Stanislavsky system could represent the facial expression that Borya’s mug acquired a moment later.
‘Who?!’
Mykola and I stood by the fire pretending naive ignorance of reasons for the tempestuous outburst of his shattered soul.
And Vasya, squatting next to Foreman to hold the workpiece pipe with both hands, dropped his look to the floor and at the same time his piggy snout turned into a stubby index finger and pointed at me like the compass needle.

‘Bitch!’

The innate instinct of self-preservation did its job and I rushed to the conveyors' section. 
A pipe-length tinkling along the cemented floor after me.
Yes, so too many foul words in Borya’s lexicon, ‘bitch!’ as if he himself was a thief-in-law.
Good luck he'd never been trained at the gorodki game…

I returned in ten minutes.
The word ‘BORYA’ on the gate wing was effaced with a servile workman mitten of Vasya.
The rest was left as it had been.
The hand of vandals had not dared destroy the masterpiece...

We played in the Mirror Hall.
Lekha sat at the ‘Jonika’, Skully – behind his ‘kitchen’, Chuba picked the strings of the bass and motionlessly staring into the dimly lit Hall.
It was a slow number, ‘white dance’ for girls to pick their partners.
Vladya's girlfriend Raya invited him and led off into the mass of dancers under the floating light specks from the mirror splinters in the ball spinning overheads. 
I, leaning my buttocks against the lowered fallboard of the upright piano in the right corner of the small stage, strummed the chords of a rhythm guitar part.
Behind the piano, Olga stood with her arms folded over the top board. 
She's bored. 
‘Kiss me,’ said she.
I turned my head to the left and, over my shoulder and the top board, merge into a long kiss with her warm soft lips.
My fingers knew without me when to go to the next chord.
The public kiss was over and I regained the normal breathing. 
‘Oy! Mother!’ exclaimed Olga.

That was the beginning of the end.
Among the dancing pairs, there really stood her mother who had arrived unexpectedly to take Olga back to Theodosia... 

And from the other end of our vast Motherland, from another port city in another sea, the band ‘Spitzbergen' arrived in Konotop from Murmansk to start playing dances at the Loony as agreed with its Director, Bohmstein. 
The ‘Spitzes’ undid us in two weeks.
Two weeks later the Mirror Hall in the Club was empty because the dancing crowd spurted to the dances in the Loony.
There, from the concert hall on the second floor, which used to be the listing for CJI battles, they took out all the audience seats and turned into the parquet ballroom.
But that’s not the point.
The restaurant group from Murmansk, consisting of four musicians from twenty to twenty-five-year-old, had branded equipment, including the ‘Roland' organ and (most importantly) they sang. 
And they sang into professional microphones with the echo effect. 
‘One!.. un!.. un! Two!.. oo!.. oo!’
The Orpheuses with their homemade equipment went kaput.
Yes, there still remained concerts in the Club, playing ‘the trash’ but the dances faded out...

Olga's mother left Konotop, along with Olga's unregistered stepfather, after she had sworn she'd come to Theodosia in two weeks but the Spitzes got anchored in the city... 

At the end of February, I saw Olga off. 
She was going by a train from Platform 4. 
She boarded the last car and with the starting jerk of the train waved to me through the glass in the car door.
I grabbed the handrails by the sides of the locked door and jumped onto the steps under it.
The train was quickly gaining speed, she got scared and frantically cried behind the glass I did not hear what, as if I did not know what I was doing.
I jumped off at the very end of the platform because further on you could really break a leg or two on the rails and sleepers and gravel.

In March I wrote her a letter.
It was a very romantic letter, that above the locksmith vise at my workplace I was seeing the heavenly features of her face.
No, I didn't copy lines from Pushkin but the essence and spirit were the same only with the altering of the lexicon for one century and a half. 
In the opinion of the Repair Shop Floor Experimental Section locksmiths, such a letter could only be written by a fucking cuntsucker. 
They had not read it, though, and neither had she because the letter did not find her in Theodosia.

Olga returned to Konotop to inform me that she was pregnant...

At those days of the planned economy and growing concern for the needs of the population, they were selling condoms in the Soviet Union even at news stalls, three kopecks apiece. 
But for me, a condom was just a word from the dirty jokes folklore and I had no idea what ‘protective care' meant. 

Then she took the pill and everything got off easy...

Spring came early, amicable and warm.
In mid-April, I started the ‘dacha' season of sleeping in the lean-to. 
I swept it and moved the mattress and blanket to the iron bed that had spent the winter there.
The same evening in the Park I called her to ‘my place’.
She easily agreed.

All the way from the Park to the Nezhin Street I was walking on clouds.
We strolled in the dark tightly catching each other at the waist.
Through the yard of the Turkovs' hutta and the back garden under the window of our hutta we sneaked into the lean-to and I latched the door. 
In the breaks between having sexes I, obedient to Valle-Inclan’s commandment, was restoring the equality between my ‘hands that already knew everything and the eyes that still hadn’t seen anything.’
I lit up matches, one by one, for the purpose and did not allow her to shyly pull the blanket over her body in their flickering light.

We woke up at dawn and walked through the deafening silence and strangeness of the empty streets to her girlfriend Sveta’s hutta so that Olga would have an alibi for her Aunt Nina.
On my way back I met the first morning pedestrian.
It was past the Bazaar, he walked in the counter direction along the other side of the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street...

I was fine with her yet I wanted to get rid of our affair.
Firstly, it was not always good.
The time when we went to the Seim and I spread her in the willow thicket everything turned out somehow flatly and not exactly the thing.
We certainly rehabilitated ourselves later, when she called me to the shower at her workplace.
Yes, she had already got a job in the city.
She was delivering telegrams from the Main Post Office.

(...it is hard to believe, but even then, in the absence of cell phones, people managed to somehow survive.
Telegrams helped to do the trick. 
They had been delivered on the Post Office blanks with the glue-mounted paper ribbons from a telegraph machine printing the words:
‘come Friday two Moscow-Kiev car ten’.

The telegrams conveyed the very essence because you had to pay for each word and for each punctuation mark including the address of the person to whom it was sent.
Alms are the insurmountable teacher to be laconic.
But if you had money to burn then, of course, you could write in full:
‘I come on Friday at two o’clock by the train Moscow-Kiev in car number ten. Period.’
and even add in the end:
‘I love you forever. Coma. My dear. Period.’
And the workers from the Main Post Office would bring the telegram in their tiny black on-duty handbag.
‘Sign here on the receipt, please.'...) 

She ended her work at five o’clock and we met at the five-story hotel ‘The Seagull’ paneled with large yellowish tiles.
On the porch, besides the entrance to the hotel, there were two more glass doors: to the Inter-City Telephone Communication Station and to the Main Post Office. 

Olga led me to the postal service entrance on the back of the building. 

In the long corridor, she went forward alone and beaconed me from its far end. 
Some doors were open and there were women sitting with their backs to me, in front of their windows in the glass partitions from the customers. 
We descended into a wide basement hall with long low windows overhead and a row of shower stalls along the wall.
Entering one of them we undressed and Olga turned the hot water on. 

(...in the early 90s the scene in the shower starring Sylvester Stallone and Sharon Stone in some action movies was declared the hottest Hollywood erotic of the year. 
But they plagiarized it from our visit to the Main Post Office!
Twenty years later.
And now they tell me there was no sex in the USSR.
Yes, there was!
Only the term for it sounded differently…)

At the end of our hot f… er… that is, scene... there was a certain moment that Hollywood did not dare to shoot.
That is when along Olga's white taut thighs in between droplets and paths of the running hot water there crawled two-three whitish-unclear spits… 
I had seen that frame before somewhere but could not recollect…

Yes. I had started to be ‘protective careful'. 

(...an incomplete bookish education at times leads to confusion.
For a long time, I entertained an erroneous opinion that masturbation mean exclusively a handwork – rubbing your dick until you cum.
But, no!
It turns out, that even in the Old Testament there was a man named Onan, who was in the habit of watering the earth floor of his tent with his seed at the end of otherwise normal sexual intercourse.
The final chord, so to speak.
The chord, to be frank, just a stinky clam, absolutely out of tune, but served a means of protective care to prevent unwanted conception…)

Well, then, secondly, I was frightened by Olga’s first pregnancy and feared a repetition – who needed that?
I did not want to get tied up and gave it a try to get rid of the delightful cause of an unwanted effect.

One dark evening on the porch of Sveta’s hutta I told her that it was time for us to part.
She started crying.
‘Why?’
I lit a cigarette.
‘We must do it. I have met another.’
‘Who?! Tell me the name!’
‘You still do not know.’
‘But tell me!’
‘Well, in short, some, well, Sveta.' 
‘Where does she live?’
‘Near the gypsies' settlement.' 
‘You’re lying!’
‘No, I am not.’
And I lit the second cigarette from the stub of the first, as in Italian black and white movies.
Though I did not want to smoke at all.
The second one was bitter and disgusting.
I smoked half of it, felt nauseated and gave up.
I surrendered to both of them: I could finish off the cigarette and I could not break up with Olga.

The following week she announced that she was pregnant again and no longer had the needed pill.

I called my parents to the lean-to because we had to have a talk.
They came in very quiet, unaccustomed to such calls.
I sat on the chair under the glassed frame by the head of the bed.
Mother remained standing over the vacant bed only leaned against it back.
Father also stood with his hand resting on the long box-workbench along the blind wall.

Then and there I announced that I would marry Olga.
‘How that you will get married?’ asked Mother.
‘As a noble man, I have to marry her,’ replied I.
My parents exchanged glances.
Father mutely shook his head.
Mother sighed and also kept silence. 
Then they sat down on the bed and started a detailed discussion of organizing the marriage of the noble man.

When I and Olga submitted an application to the ZAGS stating our wish to get married, they gave us a paper for the Bridal Salon to sell us wedding things at a discount.
In Konotop there was such a salon behind the Central Park yet there they had nothing but two dust-coated mannequins of bride and groom looking out of the dust-stained shopwindow.
We had to go to Kiev.
Lekha Kuzko went with us as an expert because he had already gone through all of that when marrying Tatyana and knew the places. 

We found rings and Olga’s one was yellower but mine wider.
We also bought new shoes for me and a white silk mini dress for Olga, and a wedding veil too.

In August our marriage was registered in the Loony.
The Hall of Celebrations there was also on the second floor but on the opposite wing from the ballroom. 
We hired a taxi for the ceremony.
At the entrance to the Hall of Celebrations, we were met with loud electric music by guys playing ‘the trash'. 
I knew the guitarist with a long deep scar on his cheek playing a red ‘Iolanta’.
He made round eyes and shrugged.
Ah! To hell! All the same, I never was good at football… 

A woman in a dark dress, with glasses and permanent curls in her bob-cut hair, read to Olga and me the rights and responsibilities of the young family which was a cell of the society. 
We signed the form.
Lekha and Sveta seconded.

‘That is all, the end to your dreams...' 

‘The trash’ players broke out with Mendelssohn’s march and the photographer from the photo studio across the road shot us with his camera on the tripod.
In the picture ready a week later, there was a not too happy smiling hairy yobbo with a guiltily arched collar of the jacket from the last year’s graduation suit.
But Olga turned out nicely, only with a somewhat wistfully face.
Probably, she did not want to get tied down at just sixteen.

The music at the wedding was played by the Orpheuses.
For free, sure thing, it was not ‘the trash’.
Zhulka was closed in his kennel with a couple of boards and in the circle free of grass which he had eliminated by trampling and dragging his chain over throughout all his dog's life, they put the instruments and equipment. 
Between the sectioned shed and the stack of the crumbled brick, a long table was set up, parallel to both, in the shade of the two age-old American maples.
Olga and I sat with our backs to the fence of the Turkovs’ yard.
The long fleece of Father’s black sheepskin coat covered both our chairs.

Around the table there sat the Arkhipenkos, Uncle Vadya with his wife whose Acceptee he was, Olga’s Mother, Maria, with her eldest daughter, Vita, Aunt Nina and Uncle Kolya, some nondescript relatives of Solodovnikovs, the neighbors from the Nezhin and nearby Streets, the Kreepaks, the Plaksins, the Kozhevnikovs, Vladya’s mother Galina Petrovna and replacing each other guys of the Settlement, always ready to drink for free.

The wedding rambled till late at night under the light of a couple of bulbs fixed in the maples. 

They chanted ‘Bitter! Bitter!’ for me and Olga to stand up and kiss each other while they count how long the kiss lasts.
Father, together with Olga's mother, was put into a pull-barrow and shoot in it along the street (Maria was not quite happy with that ancient beautiful folk custom). 
Quak bared himself to the waist and danced holding in front of him the large ax that he grabbed from the lean-to, but Uncle Kolya started to clap in tune as if he also was a rocker and, seizing a moment, took the ax from the merry Viking. 
The Settlement guys dragged Quak to his hutta because of he already was all mops and brooms.
And Skully was meanwhile copulating with Glushcha’s sister in the most primeval posture under the elm in the back garden.

In short, a normal wedding by the classic Settlement traditions it was.

Already after the midnight Olga and I retired to the marital bedchamber in our lean-to.
Only before the first wedding night, I had to scrape with a shovel Quak’s vomit out of the door and sweep away the cigarette butts that Olga’s girlfriends had left after secretive smocking.
I’d hang a padlock on the door if I had known beforehand.

The tape in the tape-recorder had been obviously played, wound and rewound from the place with the French erotic song which I prepared to play for the event. 
Hopeless to find it, I just switched the tape on from the very beginning—the song eventually would be played anyway—but when we finished it turned out that the tape reel was over too.
I did not hear when Briggite Bardot was moaning there.

Then on the tin roof of the lean-to a shower clattered and pore down on the long leaves of the corn in the garden outside the glazed frame and we just lay clasped in a tight embrace and it was good. 

The honeymoon coincided with my vacation at the Plant.
The first squabble happened on the third day of our married life.
I was sitting in the yard deciphering a sheet-music of some Spanish guitar etude.
 She walked past from the hutta to the lean-to and called me along.
I still picked strings for a minute or two, no more, before coming.
She was on the bed shedding tears because I did not need her and pay no attention.
Was that the right way to treat wives?
So I had to iron out my fault in the most effective, as far as I know, way.
Irregardless of I did not actually get it what I was guilty of.

(...and by now I had figured out that so worked the female instinct for self-preservation:
‘If you have already got me then who do you keep training on that fucking guitar for?’
However, quite possible that even now I don’t understand them right…)

Lekha Kuzko came with a blissful news – we were to play dances at the Palace of Culture of the KEMZ Plant, he had arranged it.
I was delighted, there's no life without playing dances.
And besides, when Olga and I were coming to dances at the Loony and they kicked up a fight on the Dance Floor I feared the danger for her belly, although it was not noticeable yet.

The dances at KEMZ were attended by a crowd from areas too far away from the Loony.
Although the Spitzes played better music than us but waiting for a tram after their dances took really too long.
And even some guys from the Settlement started to come to the KEMZ Palace of Culture.
People like to join familiar crowds...

Vladya and Chuba were drafted into the army.
Sur, a neighbor of Chuba’s, who was still a tenth grader, stepped into his shoes of a bass guitarist.
A guy from the Zagrebellye, handled Fofik, started to sing with us.
His crowning number was the song by Makarevitch.

‘I drink to those who’re at the sea now...’

And another one about an American pilot shot down in the sky over Vietnam. 

‘My F-4 as fast as a bullet...’

(...only recently I found out that was a Russian adaptation of the ‘Secret Service Man’ of Mel Tormé which he sang in the 50’s.
In music they always were ahead of us…)

One night Olga got with the kisses to my dick and I shouted:
‘I don’t need a waflister wife!’
She recoiled and I immediately regretted my idiocy.
Moron! Why? It was so good!
Just joined the crowd of the dirty stupid ‘seminarists’.

When it became too cold in the lean-to, we moved into the hutta on the couch in the kitchen.
At the night I tightly closed the double-leaf door between the kitchen and the room where slept my parents and my brother and sister.
Not because of we having sex every night but so that they did not guess on what night we were at it...

At the dances in KEMZ Olga rarely danced, the belly became too big and the rockin' rollers around jumped without looking where to.
And her light brown mini coat could not be fastened lower than by the two upper buttons.

One night she began to cry that I absolutely fell out of love with her.
But that was not true, I felt sorry for her and wanted to protect from everything.
She cried until she made me make love to her.
And it was good, only I tried to be very careful so as not to hurt the belly in any way.

Four days later Olga gave birth to my first daughter, Lenochka.

Children are the flowers of life until they wake up… 

‘All the day you cried and cried
With your mouth open wide,
No more crying by my side
Or I'll throw you outside!' 

Olga’s small breasts turned out to be full of milk.
After the feeding there even was a need to milk off the excess.
Well, of course, she made sure that I tried it too.
Tastes differ, no one argues, but what do these babies find in it?
Pasteurized milk is much better...

Aunt Nina said that the child must be baptized. 
We took Lenochka to a hutta nearby School 12 at the address given by Olga's aunt.
There were many people in the yard.
On the whole, it was a church but only without the cross above, sort of an underground one. 
But inside it was a usual hutta only with not a single piece of furniture.
The baby was taken out of the envelope, hastily moistened so it roared and presented with a small cross on a string. 

I forgot even to think about the holy event but end January Lyonya, the Manager of the Experimental Section and also the Komsomol Head of the Repair Shop Floor, called all the younger locksmiths to the Management Office after work for a Komsomol meeting. 
There he told that he was told by the City Komsomol Committee that I was in church and christened my child for which deed the meeting should pronounce a reprimand to me as a renegade Komsomol member. 
Everyone voted ‘pro’ at once to cut the meeting short and go home but expressed the condolence that I was not expelled completely and they would still deduct Komsomol contributions from my salary for another ten years.
Later I learned that the baptizer priest each month had to hand in the list of visitors to his crossless hutta.
That’s some underground clergyman for you...

And in February I ran into a more severe punishment.
Lekha Kuzko was going to the city of Korosten to bring electric guitars for the KEMZ Palace of Culture and I wanted to go with him.
That morning I came to the Shop Floor Management Office asking to let me go but they told me to wait for the Head of the Shop Floor.
When Lebedev’s black overcoat showed up in the Mechanical Shop Floor aisle I went out to meet him.
Apparently, he hadn’t had his back straitened yet to the proper condition or maybe kept it too upright the day before but all he could pronounce was ‘no’.
Then I saw red and left because I hadn’t changed yet into my spetzovka.
As it turned out, Lekha had been already gone to Korosten.
To make the long story short, I got ‘absence from work’ for that day and the Repair Shop Floor Head issued the order to transfer me to a lower-paid position of a workman at the Smithy Shop Floor for three months.

‘You’d better fell the wood to make you coffins –
 The penal battalions are going to attack...' 

In the Smithy Shop Floor, instead of the unrelenting hum of machine-tools rambled the thunder of hydraulic hammers that sent a tremor through the asphalt floor, mixed with the roar of violent flames bursting from nozzles in the vents of furnaces where black iron ingots were heated to the scarlet whiteness. 
The howling of hefty fans in their round grated boxes was also in the score.
Such a fan had a meter wide sweep of their blades and if it caught someone's hand then… 
That was the reason for those muzzle-gratings.

In a word, you couldn’t find a better place for improving your vocal skills.
You might shout at top of your lungs and no one would hear you.
Even I couldn’t hear myself but still kept yelling:

‘Oh, Mommy,
Oh, Mommy-Mommy blues, 
Oh, Mommy blues...’

But my yelling exercises went on only while my partner Borya learned how much we were to load that day.

Borya, like me, was a penal workman because of violation of labor discipline, but he was native there, a smith of the Smithy Floor.
He was over thirty years old, blonde and not very tall, you’d hardly guess he was a smith.
His violation had been a state of intoxication at the working place.

Our job was loading of ingots in the furnace.
The ingots were in the left wing of the Smithy Shop Floor.
They were sizable pieces of axes from the railway cars or locomotives wheel pairs cut up by the gas cutters in the first shift.
The ingots, sure enough, non-hoistable by humans so in the wing there was a crane beam with the telpher. 

I grabbed hold of them with the grip hanging from the telpher hook and Borya operated the buttons of the hand console hanging from the telpher itself and forwarded the ingots to the trolley.
There I guided them and held in place until the lowered grip opened up.
That way we loaded several layers of the ingots, depending on the length of the cut pieces (the longer, the heavier) because it was us to push the trolley along the narrow gauge track of rails.

We pushed it into the main building and there onto the turnable disc.
It looked like a sewer hatch but only was swerving in its place.
We turned it with our loaded trolley 90 degrees to the left and slowly rolled it further to the furnace. 
The most demanding point in the transportation process was moving of a still standing trolley ahead.
That’s where you had to pull your sinews in earnest and when the trolley started to slowly roll then it was ours!

Under each furnace vent, there was a wide iron shelf. 
Turning his face away from the fiery heat pouring out the vent, Borya set a half-meter-wide tube-roller on the shelf. 
We put onto the roller the oblong spade with raised edges so that the ingots wouldn't roll off from it. 
That spade had the enormous handle of five meters long and was made of steel—not iron—with the section of six by four centimeters. 
The handle ended with a crossbeam for two workmen to grab its halves from each side of the handle. 
But at first, I held the end alone so that Borya could use the nearby stationary telpher to hoist an ingot from the trolley into the spade shielding his face from the fire in the furnace with his shoulder. 
Then he turned the telpher back to the trolley came up to me and each of us grabbed his half of the crossbeam.
‘Hup!’
And we, rubbing shoulders, went three-four wide strides, accelerating to jogging, towards the flaming hell in the furnace.
The run was ended with the synchronous jump up and sharp pushing the crossbeam down with the aggregated weight of our bodies so that the springy handle would transmit the impact to the spade to toss the ingot up and out. 
With landing on the floor, your face would turn away from the scorching heat of fire raging in the furnace.
That’s why Borya worked in the smith’s protective canvas apron and I was burning to the end my once-beloved red sweater.
With our necks defensively pulled in we strode back pulling the shovel after us and Borya went to hoist the next ingot on it.

‘Hither-thither...To and fro… 
Oh!. How good it feels!..' 

Then we drove the emptied trolley back to fetch a new batch of ingots.
Inside the furnace they also had to be stacked in layers and rows starting from the deepest, otherwise, they just wouldn't fit in. 
The more of them loaded inside the shorter the runs with the shovel...

I had not immediately mastered the synchronous jumping and Borya cursed me with inaudible, behind the rumble and roar, taboo words.
The ingot dropped across a layer would fucking fuck your ass when loading the following ones. 

Borya was overly terse.
I had more communication with the fan (in a duo) than with him. 
But once Borya shouted into my ear, 
‘We’ve done forty tons today!’
The flaming furnace reflected in his pleased smile.
A labor victory!
Empty weigh-less bullshit. 
It’s just because we did it.

‘You load sixteen tons and what do you get?
Another day older and deeper in debt...’

We worked two shifts – the second and the third, leaving the first one to the gas cutters for cutting axes to pieces.
On the payday I could hardly believe my eyes – I had earned a hundred and twenty rubles a month!
‘...to a lower-paid position...’

‘Ha-ha, Mr. Lebedev!
Ha-ha! Mr. Heath! 
‘Cause I’m a workman!
Yea! Yea! Yea!..’

And to the smiths, the cashier was forking out two-three unopened packs of money in bank wrapping plus stray notes. 
Over three hundred rubles!
Yes, Borya, you’d better refrain from drinking at your working place.

‘Hither-thither...To and fro… 
Oh!... How good it feels!..' 


(...I have always been, am, and will be cursing that night when I let out that cry of the dirty stupid ‘seminarist’.
Yet, what’s said can’t be unsaid…)

And Olga again wanted something else…

Once, when I was throwing the ingots into her furnace, she began to demand,
‘Tell it… what!.. you’re doing… now...’
‘I’m… making!.. love… to you!..’
‘No!.. tell it… the other!.. way...’
‘Which… way?..’
‘You.. know!.. which...’
And I started to moan it out’
‘I'm… fuc… king… you!..' 
‘Ah!’
‘You'm… fu... cki... ng… I...' 
‘Oh, my!..’
The dark kitchen.
The baby's asleep. 
And what could it understand then…

Some other time from the darkness,
‘Hit me!’
‘You crazy?’
‘No, I’m not! Hit me!’
She made me at last slap lightly on her cheek.
‘Not this way! Hit hard!’
I knew she’d have her way anyway and gave a more sonorous slap.
She lay on her back sobbing.
‘What up? Did it hurt?’
No answer, only quiet sobs.
I had to comfort her in the most effective, as far as I know, way.
And it was good…

Then I was lying on my back thinking.
Why would she?
A slap in the face as the punishment for a misconduct?. 
I did not know anything about any…
Before me?
Without me?
Instead of?. 

(...certain thought are better not be started at all and if unwittingly started it’s better not to think them on all the way to the ultimate end…)

End May the term of my penal exile to the Smithy Shop Floor ran out and the same day I received a summons to present myself on May 27 for the draft into the army.

And again there was a feast in our hutta’s yard because in the Settlement seeing-off to the army was almost the same thing as a wedding.

They all drank and sang only without the Orpheuses’ accompaniment and Mother was carrying around the table Lenochka in her arms wrapped in a sheet over the baby’s loose jacket.
She grabbed her Grandma’s gown collar with her tiny fingers and looked around with her pink lips open in surprise...

The next morning they saw me to the two-story House of the Deaf by the bridge in the railway embankment crossing the Peace Avenue.
There were lots of draftees in the caps on their skin-headed heads and a crowd of seers-off.
Tolik Arkhipenko kept assuring everyone that I would be fine.
Olga was crying loudly.

The draftees were driven into two big buses which started to move but, after turning into the Peace Avenue, stopped  – someone was missing. 
We went out to the roadside.
The seers-off crowd rushed across the Avenue.

Olga ran up the first.
She kissed me with her soft wet lips and pressed to my chest her small soft breasts without a bra under the light summer blouse wet with her tears. 

The belated draftee was brought in a car and we were told to get on buses again.
The motor started.
The door slammed shut and the bus finally, uncompromisingly and irretrievably carried us away to where the army would make of me a real man and defender of the Homeland.
 





