~~~ My Universities: Part 1 ~~~

"And the drill ground will turn shiny
Will be polished with our boots
Will be milled to dust fine and tiny
By the brave marching recruits..."

(to the air of ‘Take the harness, guys, off your horses...’)

At the Draft Collection and Distribution Point in Sumy, I made the desperate last attempt to get exempted from army service.
At the medical check, I told the oculist that I could see just only two lines in his check table with my left eye though, in fact, I saw five. 
For all my pains, I was classified fit for non-combat service in the construction troops.
After two days of kicking around on bare-plunk decking at the Collection and Distribution Point and equally hard shelves in the railway cars for draftees, I stood on the platform of the Stavropol Railway Station in one shoe. 
Unlike the Perseus’ case, my right foot was not bare but within a cotton black sock.

And what else could I do?
Early in the morning when they commanded all to leave the car I frisked not only the section in which I slept in but the neighboring ones as well.
My right shoe was nowhere to be found.
I was starting to suspect that disappearance of my footwear item was accomplished with the vindictive hand of Valik Nazarenko from Krolevets.

Of all the guys in our car section only he had a thick pack of postcards and at each stop begged the passers-by on the station platform to drop a bunch of filled out postcards to a mailbox.
Who would deny a young boy carried away if not in a prison but still and yet locked railway car?
And when our train left the station, Valik would give his face a clever look and ask himself the same question:
‘Who else to write to?’
Just to answer to himself:
‘Ah! I know!’
And he began to fill another postcard or two that he was going to serve in the army and had already passed Rostov city. 
Then he read his production out loud for our car section.
They all were alike and inevitably ended with:
‘My best wishes, Valik’.
At some point, I suggested him to vary the word order—at least in some postcards, for a change—to make it:
‘My Valik wishes best'. 
All laughed, but he laughs best who laughs last, and I, standing on the platform in a sock, did not feel like laughing. 
My pun seemed to have kicked back and made my shoe missing at our arrival in the city of Stavropol. 
The redhead bastard paid with a practical joke for a whimsical play on words.
However, who’s not caught at action is not the joker.

We were told to get into the backs of waiting trucks that drove through an unfamiliar, not yet awaken city, then out of it, then took the left turn from the highway and after three more kilometers along an asphalt road reached a long low wall of white silicate bricks. 
The trucks turned into the gate of welded iron pipes by the check-point house with the red glass tablet announcing it was the Military-Construction Unit 11, Military Detachment 41769, but the road left behind the gate went on to the nearby horizon...

By the bathhouse, they asked us whether anyone was going to send his clothes back home. 
No one wished to.
Everyone had left for the service in their junk clothes which they dropped on the grass near the bathhouse porch.

Only in the canteen at the Rostov  Collection and Distribution Point, I saw a draftee in his suit and necktie. 
He also fell out of the picture with his age – about ten years older than the surrounding skinhead yobbos, however, younger than twenty-seven otherwise they wouldn’t draft him.
And his hair wasn’t cut.
He ate nothing, just sat without a motion looking in front of him. 
Or rather looking inward.

(...because it's from outside that we all look the same, but inside there lots upon lots to observe; the epics unfolding inside are far more cooler than the Illyad together with the Odysseus…) 

There he was sitting in a tie loosened on his thick neck, taking no notice of sympathetic looks, not knowing what was awaiting where they would take him...

In the Military-Construction Unit 11, aka VSO-11, there was a necessary minimum for keeping many people in one place.

Five long barracks paneled from inside with painted plywood sheets and encased from outside with white bricks laid in shiner position.
The barracks were connected with the common system of steam-heating pipes running in the air on tall iron props.
For the heat insulation, the pipes were wrapped in glass wool, fixed with white glass cloth and covered with the finishing layer of black roofing felt kept in place by twists of thin baling wire.

Three of the barracks were lined by the brick wall separating from the road outside, each of them surrounded by an internal asphalt path.
Behind the middle barrack, across the path, there stood a wider, but also one-story building comprising the Canteen with its kitchen, and the Club of the Detachment. 

In the third line, counting from the road, there was the bath, the stoke-house, the shoe-making and sewing shops all in one building as well.

The drill ground, covered with a rough layer of concrete, stretched from the gate and the Canteen. 
Opposite the Canteen, across the drill ground, there stood the last two barracks of all the five parallel to each other and the wall along the outside road.

At the far left corner of the drill ground, there was a brick toilet, aka sorteer, with ten holes, aka ochcos, along one wall and the cemented urinal runnel along the other. 

To the left of the sorteer, there was put a long tin trough of the washbasin raised by meter-tall rebar props above the ground.
The water pipe with a dozen taps ran along above the trough.

Further on behind the drill ground there stood three tall truck boxes under one roof and without the face wall and to the left from them – two rows of sturdy sheds serving ware and food warehouses.
Behind the warehouses, a bit on the outskirts of the Detachment rectangular grounds stood the squat structure of the pigsty. 

Ah, yes!
The last but not least – the narrow brick box of the military store by the gate, opposite the check-point house.

The narrow white wall of bricks bordered the grounds only along the asphalt road, and the rest of the perimeter was guarded by a fence of barbed wire, familiar from the very childhood. 

Behind the truck boxes and the barbed wire fence, a wide field rose hiding in the invisible hollow a deserted sand pit and the village of Tatarka which the soldiers of VSO-11 visited at their AWOLs, aka absences without leave. 

And the road by which we were brought to the Unit, having run another six kilometers, entered the village of Demino where the soldiers also went for AWOLs, as well as to the city of Stavropol, sure thing.

But all that I did not yet know leaving the bathhouse in the cotton khaki outfit and in kirza boots on top of badly wound footcloths – two strips of light coarse calico or flannel fabric, 30 by 60 centimeters, that are much more practical than common socks. 
In summer, baring your feet you'll notice the dirty stains left by the dust getting through the fabric of socks while the footcloths become dirty themselves and still keep the feet clean. 
But it is necessary to wind them properly around feet—tight, smooth and without wrinkles—otherwise, you'd rub your feet to bleeding. 
And in winter, footcloths without socks feel warmer that footcloths over socks, though both methods do not prevent toes getting frozen inside the boots...

Two soldiers from the previous drafts were sorting out the civilian clothes dropped on the grass in front of the bathhouse, checking whether there were any ‘citizen-ka’ clothes suitable for AWOLs.
We were brought to the Club of the Detachment with a stage without any curtains and rows of plywood seats filling all of the hall.
Our service started with dragging the audience seats out of the Club, washing the wide boards of its floor, bringing and installing iron two-tier beds for the Fourth Company to sleep on since we, the recruits, had to be kept in their barrack. 

At the entrance to the barrack, we were divided into three platoons under the command of a separate sergeant.
The sergeants compiled lists of their commandos checked them with the general list by the lieutenant and started training the newbies.
In all the three platoon were drilled the same commands.
‘Platoooon! Fall in!’
‘Platoooon! Fall out!’
‘Platoooon! Fall in!’
‘Platoooon! Fall out!’
‘Platoooon! Fall in!’
‘Platoooon! Fall out!’

We executed the commands keeping the hunger in check with the wishful thinking because a small group of recruits had been already sent to lay tables in the Canteen with the midday meal. 
And finally:
‘Fall in for the meal!' 
‘Slow.. march!’

In contrast to the Club where you had to step up three stairs of a porch before the door, in the Canteen, on entering the door, you went three steps down. 

In the spacious hall, there were two quads of tables separated by the central aisle. 
On both sides of each table there stood brown benches of solid planks letting for ten men to sit in a row.
Smoothly polished concrete floor filled the hall with an echoing hum like in the waiting rooms of passenger stations.
Along the whole left wall, two steps stretched under the three windows from the outside rooms.
Under all the three windows there ran one wide shelf-ledge covered with painted tin. 

The first and also the smallest of the windows was the seat of the Bread-Cutter already closed from within with its tin-covered shutter. 
The next one—wide and having no shutters—opened the view of the kitchen with the steam rising off the wide cylinders of nickel-plated boilers for cooking, and a pair of soldier-cooks, among them, in khaki trousers, slippers on bare feet and in white jackets bearing greasy stains.
One of the cooks had a white-cloth beret on his head.
The last, also long and open window connected to the Dishwashers' Room filled with steam and noise of hot water bursting from several taps at once in the long tin trough with heaps of used enamel cups and bowls, and aluminum spoons.
The far blind wall opposite the entrance separated the Canteen from the Club.
In the right wall high up above the floor, the row wooden frames kept panes of unhinged windows.

The white enamel bowls arranged in two long rows along the table marked the seating places on the benches put close by.
Twenty aluminum spoons studded with drops of water were piled in the center of the table for each eater to grab.
Next to the spoons lay a heavy dipper accompanied with twenty enamel cups adorned with combat scars from the pell-mell pileups in the dishwasher trough.
Two and a half multiply cross-sectioned loaves of ‘brick’-shaped brown bread on the crumpled aluminum tray provided twenty pieces too.
The cooks began throwing five-liter enameled pots on the ledger-shelf of the dispenser window issuing shrill indistinct.
The first meal in the army began.

The borshch was red and scorching hot.
It was brought in a pot from the dispenser window and shared into the bowls with the dipper.
Since the bowls were not to be changed the borshch should be eaten to get the second course, or refuse the first course at once and wait until the on-duty soldier would bring the next pot with pearl barley, also named ‘kirzookha'. 

(...if you carefully consider the fine pattern in the leather used for the tops of army kirza boots, you begin to understand the accuracy of the term ‘kirzookha’ for the army porridge…)

The porridge was liquid and as hot as the borshch.
Compote poured into the cups from aluminum kettles was not so hot, but also liquid.
The stunning din of a bustle in a railway station served the background for chewing and gulping.

On finishing the meal the tools of personal saturation had to be carried to the dishwasher window and put in the appropriate piles or stacks on the sill.
As they accumulate, the dishwashers themselves would topple the bowls, or spoons, or cups in the respective sections of the trough under the streams of steaming water from taps. 
Now we could leave the Canteen and return to the ‘training’ barrack so as not to miss the next command to fall in.

The following army experience showed that borshch did not happen for breakfasts and suppers, those started with ‘kirzookha’ at once, but in the morning next to the bread on the tables they put trays with inch by inch by half-inch cubes of yellow butter got from from the Bread-Cutter's window, which you spread on the bread with the same aluminum spoon handle.
If the butter was brought in one piece it was portioned by the most authoritative serviceman of those present at the table.
The piece of butter could also be reduced by a serviceman who started his army service a year and a half earlier and now approached your table to reward himself for his combat merits.
The lump sugar brought for tea would also do for an honored veteran...

On the whole, the ration was unpretentious but enough for survival. 
In autumn it became even simpler – water and cabbage for the first course, cabbage without water for the second, and water without cabbage for the third.
On a lucky day, you could see a lump of lard floating in your portion of the ‘kirzookha' porridge (the detachment had its pigsty, after all) but nothing beyond the lard. 
And on the Soviet holidays, they would add white buns for tea... 

At first, I couldn’t eat soldiers’ food.
Not that I was squeamish, but simply because of no matter how hard I tried I just couldn’t manage to stuff that ration into myself.
It just stuck in the throat.
At one of the meals a soldier from the previous draft seeing my diligent agony laughed and said:
‘No fear! You’ll get used and start to havvat anything.’
He was right.

The matter is that in the construction battalion they did not eat, but ‘havvat’.

‘The company went to havvat – catch on!'
'And what havvage is it today?'

As soon as I stopped eating and started havvating, everything fell into place.
At times I even havvatted an additional portion.

But that came later because if a soldier in his first half a year in the service—aka ‘young', or ‘salaga', or ‘salabon'—would approach the dispenser window with the bowl in his hands, the cook, most likely, would feel lazy to splash in it a scoop of havvage and shriek instead: 
‘Fuck you, salabon!’
Not because of being a genetic misanthropist, but just aping the attitude he had suffered from when being a ‘young' himself. 
However, he might and not start shrieking – exceptions happen anywhere.

(...in two years of army service, a Soviet soldier ascended the hierarchical ladder of servicemanship. 
The first six months he was a ‘salaga’, aka ‘young’, aka ‘salabon’.
For the next six months—after the following draft had brought in a new wave of ‘youngs'—he became a ‘dipper'. 
One year of service and two younger drafts behind raised him to ‘pheasants’.
For the concluding six months with no old-timers above him, he was ‘grandpa’.
And, at last, the Minister of Defence signed the order on the demobilization of the servicemen drafted, like him, two years ago: he turned into ‘dembel' to be dismissed with the arrival of the new draftees. 

The hierarchy terminology is not too hieroglyphic. 
‘Young’ meant the youngest in the service.
‘Dippers’ were entrusted with dealing the havvage out – for the ‘youngs’ too early, for the senior servicemen below their status.
‘Phesants' took in the width of their cotton pants to have them skin-tight close-fitting and started to stagger like dandies. 
‘Grandpa' was antipodal to ‘young', and ‘dembel' just a nice abbreviation for ‘demobilization'. 

To go through that ladder you had to live two years.
At the age of eighteen or twenty that quantity of time seems an eternity.
Besides, the quality of time in the army is unpredictable: some days fly by hardly having started, and vice versa – you feel that no less than a week had passed already – but no! – it’s still today.
The latter type of time amount in the army is greater than the first. 

The most miserable lot was that of ‘dembels’ who had pulled and pushed and dragged the un-embraceable lump of two years to the finish.
For them each hour became an eternity filled with soul trepidation, un-get-ridable anxiety, disbelief that that was possible at all. 

Soldiers on the lower rungs of the ladder tried to spur time by means of card calendars where all the twelve months of the year were printed on one side, and the other side called to keep money in the saving banks or fly by airplanes of the Aeroflot.
They ruthlessly pricked each day lived through with a needle, one by one.
The card calendars lost their glossy appeal, but when raised against the sky showed quads of pin-thick holes – one for a month lived through.
Calendar-pricking calls for a disciplined unswerving mind and remarkable willpower.
Not by a single pheasant had I seen such a calendar.
Eternity will humble anyone and crush any pride…)
catch up!’catch up!’
‘What havvage is it today?’
‘What havvage is it today?’
The first day of service ended midnight – we were trained to fit into forty-five seconds when going to sleep or getting up after it.

In the time specified, you had to remove all your outfit carefully stack the items on a stool in the central aisle lit with the long daylight lamps, to dive into your bunk in the ‘koobrik’ and cover yourself with a sheet and blanket.
Koobrik was composed of a dense group of four two-tier bunk beds separated from the neighboring koobriks by narrow passages where you collided with those who slept in the next koobrik. 

The collisions were just inevitable.
The width of the inter-koobrik passage was dictated by the cabinet-box in its end.
Forty-centimeter-wide cabinet-box squeezed from both sides by bunk beds made the width of the passage for eight newbies rushing to their bunks.
Oops!.

The cabinet-box was seventy centimeters high and had a drawer under its top.
The door beneath the drawer opened access to the shelves inside.
Those two shelves and the drawer were allotted to eight people—four from each koobrik—whose bunk beds towered above the half-meter-wide passage.

If in the passage there was a bunk bed of a ‘grandpa’ the whole cabinet-box was his, the drawer and both shelves, and that was not a matter for discussions.
If it were a ‘pheasant' in place of a ‘grandpa' he could share the lower shelf, still, not every ‘pheasant' would. 

Construction battalion trained you to live lightly, and not to burden yourself with things you could do without. 
As for the ‘Neva' blades and the machine of a safety razor, they could find a place on the shelf of the buddies from your draft who had neither oldies nor birds in the passage of their koobrik. 

Raising questions before commanding officers had undesirable backwash on the state of health.
The ‘pheasant-grandpa’ system was the pledge of military discipline in the army and an officer with a disregard to it was sawing off a bough he sat upon.
Therefore, in case of addressing him with some complaint, he complained about you to the ‘grandpas'. 
In the evening he went home after his day at the service and at night the ‘grandpas’ were spoiling your state of health.

Yet all that was to be discovered later, and now the sergeants were walking along the central aisle of the training barrack looking for a boot with a footcloth wound not accurately enough around its top, or a belt too carelessly dropped over the stool in a hurry, or the absence of any part of the outfit – the son of a bitch had dived under the blanket half-dressed! 
Finding where to find fault they commanded a general ‘get up!’ and the training began anew.
No chance that we started to do the job any better, most likely the sergeants themselves wanted to sleep. 
After another 'to beds!' they did not command ‘get up!' and the daylight lamps over the central aisle were switched off except for the one over the cabinet-box at the entrance to the barrack. 
Its remote light was not a hindrance, you could close your eyes and…
‘Get up!!’
What? What for?! O, shit, it’s morning! And where’s the night?

(...I have told already that time in the army is a dirty bitch, ain’t I?..)

A couple of ‘get up!’ were conducted but without nit-picking just to remind you’re in the army, bastards.
The reason for such leniency was the breakfast ahead and if we were late for it the cook-‘grandpa' would accost the sergeants with a ‘J'ai presque dû attendre' from the dispenser window. 

(...the kings of France had a special courtier in office to stomp a stick on the floor when the king was entering a hall in one of the royal palaces. 
And the stomper shouted his announcement:
‘His Majesty the King!’
And one day at the Louvre, Louis of Certain Number approaching the door to the general hall noticed that the Herald was not in place. 
Maybe, dropped around a corner to correct some kind of mess in his outfit…
But in the very last moment, from nowhere, the courtier with the stick ducked in the doorway and—as required by the statute—boomed bang into the floor. 
‘His Majesty the King!’
Actually, the King hadn’t even had to march on the spot and he, coming in, without much fuss reproached the servant in a royal way,
‘J'ai presque dû attendre.’
When translated from French, it means ‘I almost had to wait’…)

But the ‘grandpa' in the window would translate it another way, 
‘You fucking bitch! Got too fucking cocky, eh?
They threw the sergeant's snot across your shoulder-strap and you lost your sense of smell? I fucked you together with your rank! You be late once again and I'll have you dispense the pots. You fucking cock!' 
And the sergeant would have nothing to parry such a translation with because if though being not a ‘cock' yet for the current moment he still was just a ‘pheasant'. 

(...What on earth could any king have to do with our construction battalion?
The most intimate connection.
Unofficially, the military construction battalions—aka conbats—of the Soviet Army were named ‘the royal troops’.
Got that under your belt?
On we go.
The outfit of the military conbat soldier, aka conbatist, consisted of a khaki fore-and-aft cap with a small red-cherry star screwed in its bow with the still smaller yellow sickle-and-hammer inside.
The star was a very important detail.
Its role was to determine the front and end parts of the headgear.
On the strength of its shape, the fore-and-aft cap was no use to protect the soldier’s ears.
When caught in the strong wind or rain you could turn off the cap’s flaps and pull that on the skull, but that gave the serviceman the appearance of a mugger in a ‘condom’ hat.
Under certain circumstances the conbatist could even put his fore-and-aft cap across his head, that is, with the star transferred into position above the ear.
The trick was supposed to present a motif ‘a la Tricorn of Bonaparte', however, on the whole, that looked like a fucking moron with the star on the side of his fucking gibbosity. 

The head of the conbat soldier could alternately be covered with a forage cap, but, according to the statute, the forage cap should be accompanied by the jacket and trousers over the blunt-nosed high shoes of black leather. 
Such a set was briefly referred to as ‘parade-crap' (ceremonial uniform) with black shoulder-straps on the shoulders of the jacket. 

(...black is always in fashion…)

The black insignia fields in the collar of the ceremonial outfit were decorated with miniature emblems of military construction troops of a yellow alloy. 
The same emblem was repeated in a larger size on the forearm part of the jacket sleeve, but already without any metal impurities. 

The Brief Heraldic Explication of the Canbat Emblem

“The Battalion Commander pours forth thunder and lightning;
The Ensign trots like a squirrel in the wheel;
but I dropped the anchor and don't care a fuck, so they cannot drive me onward even with a fucking bulldozer." 

Between the parade-crap lapels peeped a khaki shirt and a tie of a darker khaki with the elastic string—like that in underpants—hidden under the collar and secretly holding the tie in place.

But let’s come back to the casual (everyday) uniform the upper part of which (the cap) was already discussed.
The innermost layer of it was underpants and a tank-shirt (in winter long-sleeve undershirt and long johns).
Then came the cotton khaki jacket without any shoulder straps (in case you got some rank distinguished by the number of yellow strips across the shoulder strap then everything needed for the insignia you’d find yourself).
The jacket was fastened in front with five buttons made of light plastic with the bas-relief of the star with sickle and hammer crossed in its center. 
The skirts of the jacket reached the middle of the thighs.
On both sides—just below the waist—straight pockets with flaps above them so that the earth and sand did not get in while digging holes.
The buttons in the wide sleeve cuffs were of the same green plastic and same design but smaller in size.
Under the left breast of the jacket, there was an inner sack-like pocket of a khaki canvas. 

The casual form trousers were a peak of pragmatism – two cotton pipes of legs narrowing downwards overlaid with large patches on knees for hardening and prolonging the service life of the item; two upright pockets on the hips; one fly with small buttons bearing no emblems.
(At the ends of legs there were inch-wide strips sewn across the openings but those were cut off at once so that they wouldn't fuck your brains and rub your feet.) 

In winter the cap was replaced by a hat with ear-flaps made of artificial gray fur.
The fastening strings at the flap end allowed for wearing such a hat in four distinct manners: 
1.   ‘ears up'-type, (crown of King Solomon); 
2.   ‘ears under the back of the head'-type, (cautious rabbit); 
3.   ‘ears loosened’-type, (proud hawk coasting);
4.   ‘ears tied under the chin’-type, (a partner for sparring).

A padded jacket constituted the outmost layer worn in winter.
Upright stitches keeping the wool lining in place made the jacket look like a hybrid of epic heroes combat outfit and concentration camp uniform only in just one khaki color.

Instead of a padded jacket, a soldier could wear a pea jacket with the smooth surface. 
The latter surpassed the padded jacket in many ways.
Firstly, there was twice as much of wool in its lining and hence it was warmer.
Secondly, it extended long to the middle of the thighs, covering the groin and buttock from the nasty extremes of winter weather.

And one final return to the parade-crap.
A double-breasted overcoat of cloth-felt was added to it in winter.
It ended a bit below the knees and had two vertical rows of yellow buttons on the breast (one of them decorative).
Behind—across the sacrum—there was sewn a short decorative length of a belt with two decorative buttons on its ends under which, just below the rectum, started the vertical gash dividing the skirts – in case of a need of quickening the pace or for any other needs.

The last but not least, the wide belt of sturdy tarpaulin with the weighty metal plate-buckle which could be used for a host of purposes starting from digging a hole up to becoming a lethal weapon in a fight as a mace on a string, sort of.

Here, in short, how a soldier of construction battalion, aka conbatist, was dressed.

Though we, the spring draft of 1973, at first were honored and trusted to finish off the Russian and Red Armies' tunics of the classic model, which had been inherited and kicking back around in the warehouses of the Soviet Army. 
Later, when we had worn them off to tatters and they became a rarity the ‘pheasants’ were pissing with boiling water to get such a one, unlike everyone’s else.

A comparative analysis of the component items in the outfit of a conbatist serviceman proves that the most idiotic piece of it was the forage cap in which it's uncomfortable to sleep because of its hard visor and which it's impossible to pull over your ears…) 
