
Some strange sensation when you are in the cab of a truck tumbling under the slope.
It’s like you were a fish in a bowl.
Probably, that is weightlessness.
The driver, the rudder, the door, the driver again hovering by are floating past you…
I landed on him.
The truck lay on its side.
But the driver was the first to climb out through the window overhead.
I followed him.
The buddies from the truck back were already standing by the driver.
Lucky guys.
On the road the Battalion Commander’s ‘goat’-Willis squeaked with brakes.
Without waiting for the continuation, I entered the green foliage of the forest edge. 
‘Who else was that?’
‘I dunno, someone from the Separate Company asked for a ride…' 

After two kilometers the forest was over, as well as the tense tremor in my hands, and I entered the city. 
I went to a cinema to take off the adrenaline.
It was ‘How to Steal Million’ with Peter O’Toole.
Or was it ‘Remarriage’ with Belmondo?
No!
After Belmondo, I met Nadya. 
A student of something there.
We walked for a long time, I intermittently hugged her, but when I started kissing she bit my tongue. 
‘I know what you’re hinting at!’
What a fool!
What hints were there? 
It hurt so, I could hardly speak.

I saw her to a one-story house where she rented an apartment.
She went in and brought out a can of condensed milk.
Sort of a consolation prize to a wounded warrior.
I hugged her for a goodbye but shunt kissing.

Left alone, I looked at the can in my hand then at the wall of the house.
No sticking out nail could be seen there.
Putting the can on the railing I left.
Not for my bitten tongue...

Only four dembels remained in the construction battalion – I, Gray, Red from Dnepropetrovsk, and Sasha Roodko.
I had already got myself a parade-crap – borrowed from a ‘pheasant’.
Because of transferring me to the Fourth Company as a stoker, after one year of service, I missed getting a parade-crap both in the First and in the Fourth Companies. 

In the morning before the Dispensing there started up a round-dance by the sorteer.
The eager on-lookers hasting to the entertainment informed that the night before Gray made a ‘young' auto crane driver take him from a site to the battalion and reaching the Separate Company changed him at the rudder and crashed into a pole. 
Nothing terrible happened, the auto crane was not even in need of repair. 
However, the Chief of Staff when learning all that in the morning got furious and started the scrap with Gray.
YOU FACKER!
What swing! What a hook!
The major put the whole weight of his body into the punch and… missed.
Gray had dodged.
Hmm… Boo, major!
And I had always thought you were a boxer…
The soldiers helped the Chief of Staff to get back on his feet.
The on-duties escorted beltless Gray to the clink... 

At the Morning Dispensing Zampolit announced that Red was going to demobilization and Roodko and I the following day as well.
‘Comrade Zampolit, I need a testimonial.’
‘What testimonial?’
‘For admission to the institute.’
‘You, Ogoltsoff, are an absolute, fuck it, son of a bitch! Are you fucking sane? An alcoholic, a druggie, a gangsta!
I’ll give you such a testimonial that no zone will accept you but the jug for lifers!
It’s our fault before the society that you get out of here at all.
But the society will deal with you, will mill you and crumble into a fine powder!' 

The three of us were paid money at the Staff barracks.
Wow! So I had some earnings!
One hundred and twenty rubles for two years of honest work. 

Roodko and I went to see Red off and equip ourselves at the same go.

In the city, Roodko bought himself a sports bag for traveling home, and I chose a ‘diplomat'-case – they were just getting a vogue. 
Its black plastic interior received into custody the dembel stuff: pantyhose for Olga in transparent cellophane, a bottle of vodka for me and my father and a crimson silk tablecloth with a fringe for 7 rubles 50 kopecks which Red had bought for his mother and asked me to keep in the ‘diplomat’ while we were sprinkling down the dust on his way home.
I also put there the kicks – light and practical, made of black corduroy for just six-fifty because in the battalion I couldn’t find shoes for the parade-crap I wore and those in which I entered the city were borrowed from the Third Company storeroom for just a day.
After the Red's way was sprinkled properly and we with noisy goodbyes came near the stop of buses going to the station I was not drunk and clearly remembered about that crimson silk tablecloth in my ‘diplomat’.
I did not remind Red of the gift he had bought for his mother.
I stole it.
At some point, giving me one last chance, he turned a sober look at me – would I tell him?
But I kept silent.
He drunkenly dropped his head and walked to the bus.
I watched the distance growing between us on the sunlit sidewalk – ten meters, twenty… 
But I never called out:
‘Red! You forgot, bro!’

(… and no bastard from the banks of Varanda will ever be of help to redress that…)

At the next Morning Dispensing, Roodko and I stood facing the ranks and the Chief of Stuff announced that we were going to the demobilization.
We made turn ‘to left!' – I, with my black ‘diplomat, and Roodko, with his blue sports bag. 

After a couple of steps, the Battalion Commander spotted the corduroy kicks on me, heading to the gate behind which the society lurked in ambush making ready to grind me down to powder at the nearest convenient moment. 
The Battalion Commander made the last desperate attempt to save the doomed:
‘What the fuck?! See the fucking shit on the son of a bitch!' 
‘Let him fucking get away!’ said the Chief of Staff. ‘The fucker has already fucked here all off fucking limits!’
Good-bye and you, Fathers-Commanders…

But even 24 hours later I was still in Stavropol.
At the city airport with its rustic looks.
Just serving ‘as it’s necessary’ was not enough, it was necessary to manage to return home.

I had a flight ticket to Kiev bought from the city Aeroflot office, but when I arrived at the kolkhoz field of an airport the flight was delayed for an hour, then for another hour and only by noon the piston-plane AN-24 ran along the takeoff strip and beneath the wing of the aircraft, under the hum of motors, floated rarefied clouds and topographic landscapes.

The conbat remained in the past but I still stayed in the Construction Battalion and was thinking about the First Company master sergeant who clung to me in a city bus last week.
And the main thing, did he really need it? 
He was in a civilian outfit.
Because of he was drunk decided to show off what an important piece of shit he was, that’s why.
‘What are you doing here? Go to the barracks at once. I’ll report to the Battalion Commander at the Morning Dispensing!’
‘And I’ll say you were drunk like a pig.’
No one said anything to anyone.

And that major also was in civilian.
How could I know?
‘I’m a major!’ hollered he. ‘How dare you?’
Who’d guess you were a major when you’re in civilian rags?
Look at me – all’s clear.
The shoulder strap clear of any crap means clear conscience – a rank-and-file construction battalion!
It’s because of that barmaid in the cafe that we had a scrape.
She was a good sort and more inclined to me at first before he flashed his rank trump. 
Maybe a bluff?
No, you can’t deceive such a woman.

I still belong to the Construction Battalion.
Forever.
I still carry somewhat of it in myself.
To the end.

But I did not think of anything like that then. 
I was just a dembel flying home.
Not home meaning ‘barracks’, but home meaning ‘home’.

Although my mother wrote to me in her letter that they had sold the hatta and bought half of a house further on in the Settlement.
No fear, I got the address, I would find it.

But I couldn’t think about Konotop for long, I had used to thinking about other things and I thought usual thoughts.
As we took the drummer from Pyatigorsk to the military flight school to show that he was really good.

There went three of us – Long, the drummer and I.
We wanted the cadets from the vocal-instrumental ensemble at the flight school saw for themselves that the drummer was a pro so that they would put a word to their zampolit to find him some position in the school's chmo because he had to be drafted to the army. 
Such was the idea.

The cadets were just rehearsing on stage.
The hall was like a summer cinema, without the roof.
They gave Long their guitar, the drummer sat behind the drums…
And they made a duet da bomb, a potpourri of Jimmy and Jimmy. 
Had let their souls have a flight… 
Poor fools!
They sort of run a bulldozer over those rosy cadets in the blue shoulder straps.
The cadets needed a drummer of the kind that follows the pioneer banner next to the bugler:
du-du-du-dú! du-du-du-dú!
Hardly they would ever mention to their zampolit about such Drummer.
Such well-groomed boys, them those cadets.
Well-fed too.

Was it all over?
No more evening checks?
Neither Zampolit, nor Chief of Staff, nor pieces…

I was flying home.
At home, everything would be nyshtyak! 
Not for nothing, I had been dreaming of it all those two years or, rather did not allow myself to think about home. 
That was my first flight in an airplane.
Better than crawling the whole two days by train.

My wrist hurt a bit.
That fool in the hotel last night.
She would give only there was nowhere to. 
Let’s go to your room said she.
I asked the mujiks in the room and they left.
So while she was showing how virgin she was and maimed my wrist with her fingernails they started to return – one by one.
The session’s over.
But I didn't strong-arm her, she just grabbed my hand and started her claw-work. 
That Stavropol was some breeding ground for sadist chicks, nothing more, nothing less. 
Maybe Olga would not notice.
But if she would then what?
You could get any kind of scars when on your combat duty.

The AN-24 landed in Rostov.
I went to the toilet near the takeoff field and on the way back a military patrol stopped me.
Right! Corduroy shoes were an utter breach of the inner military service statute, but I'm dembel flying home and the plane's already buzzing its propellers! 
They let me go.

Refueling in Kharkov and at last – there it was!
Brim-filled with the summer sun, the Boryspol airport.

On that first flight, I decided that it was already Kiev and going to the sunny square full of all kinds of transport and scurrying pedestrians, went straight to the big shield with the letter ‘T’ and two rows of chessboard cells – to take a taxi.

The taxi driver was a long-haired young mujik about the age of thirty.
I liked his good brown leather shoes with wide laces. 
I told him to go to the railway station and he asked me to wait in the car while he would look for fellow travelers. 
There were still forty-eight kilometers to Kiev.

He left and I remained to wait in the front seat. 
It was hot and I took off my parade-crap jacket and, in order to pass the time and smooth out the growing tension, I stuffed and smoked a joint.
The driver brought two passengers: a major and a lieutenant-colonel, but younger than our Battalion Commander, and we started off.

Maybe that driver in brown shoes got the scent of grass in the car and was carried away by his personal memories, but he drove like mad and after crossing the Dnieper over the Paton Bridge he completely dropped noticing the traffic lights. 
Or maybe it was a day-off for the traffic lights—a holiday of free driving—anyone overtaking whoever they wanted, however, they could. 


Paying at the station, the lieutenant-colonel said,
‘Well, chief, you’re flying indeed!’
So, most likely, the driver really got a drag on the wake.

In 1975, ‘diplomat’-cases were not seen too often and therefore attracted attention by their foreign appearance.
It would be forgivable for some senior officers, but I was stopped by a military patrol the moment I entered the Central Hall of the Kiev Railway Station.
And again, by the way, they were cadets but already in red shoulder straps.
They checked my military ID and the demobilization papers. 
Nothing to find fault with.

And then I made a mistake by looking at my shoes.
The patrol commander followed my glance down and saw a flagrant violation of the statutory uniform.
I was taken to the station military commandant office under the magnificent stairs which led to the giant marble statue of Lenin’s head on the landing half-way to the second floor.

The on-duty officer at the commandant office told me to open the ‘diplomat’ and at a glance realized that I was a dembel: pantyhose, a bottle of vodka and the stolen tablecloth with fringe.
‘Go,’ said he. ‘Come back in uniform shoes and you'll get your case.’

I rushed to the huge ticket-offices hall on the left.
There was a long line at the ticket office of the Moscow direction.
In the line, some thirty meters from the ticket-office I made out a soldier in a parade-crap.
He was a big man, which meant his feet were not small and he looked sad so (that’s elementary) he was returning after his leave to serve another year.
‘Where are you going?’
‘To Moscow.’
‘Come on.’
I led him straight to the window of the ticket office and explained to the line, suddenly grown so clamorous,  that we had an urgent order to protect their peace and sleep on the remote borders of our Homeland. 
He took a ticket to Moscow and I for me to Konotop.
When we moved away I described to him the situation with the case.

A ‘pheasant’ cannot say ‘no’ to a dembel.
We sat on one of the many benches in the Waiting Hall and exchanged shoes.

‘Where could you manage so fast?’ asked the on-duty officer at the commandant office.
‘Bought from a gypsy on the platform.’

With the case set free, I hurried to the Waiting Hall where the sad holidaymaker hid his feet in statute violating shoes deeper under the bench.
I sat down next to him, but we did not have time to change – the loudspeakers announced that the train to Moscow was going to start off the sixth platform and we ran there not to be late.

The laces on the borrowed shoes got loose and lashed the floor on the run, but we got in time.

The train hastily knocked along the rails, it was carrying me to Konotop but my uptightness did not subside; I drove the train to go faster and found no place for myself.

Only late at night getting off the train on the platform 4 of the Konotop Station I believed that that’s it.

‘As the soldier's come home
After his service's done...’

And I again rode the same tram number three, but already right to the very terminal of its route.
The darkness outside the window made the pane-glass reflect vaguely the khaki jacket and the forage cap of the soldier parade-crap.
At the terminal, I asked where the Decemberists Street was and they told me to go that way. 
Long fences. 
Huttas behind their wickets. 
Rare lampposts.
Unfamiliar outskirts. 
Having asked someone else along the way, I went out onto the Decemberists Street and walked along it until I reached the wicket with the plate hardly discernible in the dark.
Number 13.
I entered the yard and knocked on the first door of the hutta.
It opened.
Is that my father so gray-haired? When?
In the light falling from the open door, he looked incredulously at my parade-crap. 
‘Sehrguey?’
He turned to the inner house.
‘Galya! Sehrguey has come!’

My mother strode out onto the porch and buried her head in the breast of the parade-crap jacket with loud tears. 
I awkwardly patted her shoulder.
‘Well, Mom, calm down, I’m back after all.’
I really did not know what there was to cry about.

(...it’s only now I realize that she was crying about herself, about her flashed life.
Just recently she’s been scampering to the ballet school with her girlfriends and—here you are!—a man in the parade-crap in front of her, like, the son from the army came back.
When?..)

She looked back at the small frightened girl standing by the kitchen table and, finishing the last sob, said:
‘What do you fear, silly? It’s your dad who’s come.’
Then she turned back to me:
‘How come you did not meet Olga? She went to the third shift. She works at the brick factory.’

...service's done...




