
Each barracks entrance had an outside entrance hall in the middle of the barrack’s long wall.
The hall was a three by three low-ceiling vestibule paved with large gray tiles and with large lattice windows in all the length of its side walls.
Outside the front door, a rectangular grating of parallel rebars covered a shallow concrete pit to give room for the dirt scraped off the boots with the grating. 
Near the vestibule, there stood an open gazebo about the same size with a bench of three beams running along its plank sides. 
The four-sided roof rested on the posts in the gazebo corners.
In the center of the cemented floor there again was a pit but with round walls for the servicemen to throw their cigarette butts in, the on-duty soldiers would eventually clean the pit up.
Next to the gazebo, there was put a two-meter-long footrest for several people to put their one or another foot on when polishing their boots. 

Anything omitted?
Oh, yes! And the grass on both sides of the asphalt path.

When the sergeants got bored of drilling us in the drill ground between the Gate and the Canteen and the Sorteer or tired of driving it home to us the meaning of lines in the booklet of the Internal Service Statute they commanded the eradication of ragweed. 

I had used to think that ambrosia was a cheerful drink at the feasts of the eternally young, immortal gods of Olympus but it turned out to be a terribly harmful grass.
We were shown sheets with the printed text and the culprit's black and white picture – wanted, find and eradicate. 
The hay fever spreading offender should be liquidated.

That was a good job because the sergeants disappeared for an hour or so and we could talk and get acquainted in no hurry.
From Konotop, for instance, I was the only one but there were a lot of fellow countrymen from the Sumy region – of Buryn, Krolevets, Shostka cities.
In general, the entire spring draft to VSO-11 was from Ukraine, only the guys from Dnepropetrovsk were brought before us.
They had already undergone the training and distributed to the companies of the battalion.
Taking advantage of the sergeants’ absence a couple of them sneaked into the gazebo to collect the cigarette butts from the round hole which we had thrown there at the command to fall in.

Nobody really knew why poor Ambrosia was hunted so severely down and it was nowhere to be seen around but the talks in the grass helped to temporarily forget about the eternity that had befallen us for the following two years...

In the newly acquired outfit, it was hard to get trained for ‘get up!' command, the buttons balked at getting in and out of the buttonholes. 
On the advice of Vitya Strelyany, I widened them with an aluminum spoon handle in the Canteen and they began to fly in and out nice and swiftly... 

The immediate goal of the drill training was to sell ourselves on the Oath Day.
All in all, there were three platoons in the ‘training' barrack with one and the same song for them all which was often aired by the ‘Mayak' Radio Station. 

‘In two winters,
Merely in two winters,
In two summers,
Merely in two summers
I’ll do my service in the army
And come back to you...’

After the first platoon circled round and round the drill ground in parade march singing it in chorus until they did ‘stop! One-two!', the second platoon marched into the same ground singing the same song and it became unbearably long. 
And then, after them, we, the third platoon, stomped in yelling about the third pair of winters and summers which was an obvious redundancy. 
Even among the recruits there was restrained giggling, the sergeants of the first and second platoons laughed outright and our sergeant became nervous.
When I told him I could prepare another song for us to sing, only I needed a pen and paper, he did not immediately understand what I was talking about but then I was set free from the drill ground to do creative work for the benefit of the platoon.
The paper and pen would be given by the on-duty soldier from the cabinet-box at the entrance.

The first thing you saw on entering the barracks was a soldier standing at the cabinet-box.
The soldier was an on-duty serviceman and the cabinet-box was his watch.
From that post, he had to issue the command ‘Company! At attention!' when an officer entered the barracks. 
There were two on-duty servicemen daily.
They replaced each other at the watch by the cabinet-box every four hours and at the meal time, the one free from the watch went to the Canteen under command of the sergeant on-duty to lay the tables for the company servicemen to have their havvage. 
Those three (the on-duty sergeant and the two private men) were called ‘duty unit' and remained it for the stretch of twenty-four hours. 

The on-duty sergeant was surprised by my request but he gave me the needed pen and paper.
I went to the room in the end of the aisle which the company political Commander, aka zampolit,  called ‘Leninist room’ because of its walls were paneled with yellow chipboard and next to the mirror there was the Leader’s profile painted with two colors, but in the soldiers’ lingo it was ‘live-mains’ because of the wall sockets for an iron or electric razors and the mirror wide enough for two or three of shaving themselves at once.

Music was not the problem – everybody knew the perennial hit:

‘Maroosya, a black-haired girl,
Picked berries
Of gelder rose...' 

But not everyone knew that originally it was the song ‘Take the harness, guys, off your horses...' which meant that it got used to transformations of its lyrics: 

‘Our parade march is the best,
And our song’s the loudest,
That’s the tune
Of our platoon!..’

Siting over a sheet of paper I twirled the pen in my fingers picking up words in my mind, fitting them this or that way.
And the Leninist live-mains around me, and the cotton smell from my uniform and the smarting itch of my right foot rubbed to bleeding faded into the background. 
I was in AWOL from the army...

Yes, we learned and sang it.

At the end of the day, the rookies stood at ease about the entrance to the ‘training' barrack. 
The master sergeant of the fourth company passed by – a man of about forty with a good-natured face and a paunch of the potbelly. 
He stopped to ask where we were drafted from.
Probably, he wanted to while away the half an hour till five o’clock when the ensigns and officers and the pair or two of women from the accountancy at the Detachment Staff were taken to the Stavropol-City.
Only the on-duty officer stayed for the night in the battalion.

One of us, Vanya by his name, seeing the human disposition of the senior in rank, ingratiatingly smiled and asked: 
‘Comrade master sergeant, could they exempt me because of this?’
He lowered his head and rested his index finger in a wide scar on his pate surrounded by the bristles of the close-cut.
‘Fucking smartie, gonna fuck the army?’, said the master sergeant. ‘No fucking way!’
And he slapped Vanya’s shoulder blades with his broad fatty hand.
From the sonorous spank, Vanya bent in the opposite direction and painfully pursed his lips: 
‘Ouch!’
The soldiers readily laughed to the joke of the senior in the rank...

As for the tactical drills, I even liked them. 
All the three platoons of rookies were formed into one column and marched out of the battalion grounds to the field next to the pigsty.
The sergeants explained that ‘flash’ meant a nuclear bomb explosion and it was necessary to drop flat on the ground with your head in the flash's direction.
Then the command ‘run march!’ followed and when the whole column moved to a disorderly trot one of the sergeants yelled:
‘Flash on right!’
With animated screams, we fell incongruously on the grass. 
The drill was repeated for several times.

(...when we ourselves became ‘grandpas’ and the servicemen from my draft recollected those ‘flash on left!’ and ‘flash on right!’ as one of the inhuman trials for the startup ‘youngs’ I could not understand them.
I still do not understand.
Running in the summer field, tumbling in the green grass when there is strength and wish – it’s fun!

‘How young we were at that time!
How young we were at that time!.’...)

After the fatigue denying and hard training in the unforgettable four days, we took the Military Oath and became serviceman of the armed forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 
No, we did not hold any automatic or other kind weapons as was the Soviet Army custom for that ceremonial event. 

We took turns stepping out of the ranks to the desk on the asphalt path, picked up the sheet with the printed text of the Oath, read it, put it back onto the desk, signed another sheet (the lieutenant indicated the place for the signature) and stepped back to the ranks to turn about and face the long wall of the barrack made of white silicate brick laid in shiner position.

Behind the desk, facing our ranks, two officers stood.
If someone of the Oath Takers did not quite get along with the reading they did not really pick on him – just finish it off quick and scribble your scratch on the sheet. 

In the end, the lieutenant asked if anyone had a medical education. 
After a moment of refrained disarray in the ranks, a young soldier stepped out and reported that he was helping the paramedic at the first-aid post in his village.
He was kept to continue his service at the fourth company as well as four professional drivers from our draft.

(… how many times in the two years that followed I cursed myself with every taboo word under the sun for not stepping forward to report my three years of preparation for entering the medical institute for the department of neurosurgery!.) 

Then they announced us who belonged to which company.
I got in the first – the company of masons.
The second and the third were plasterers.
The forth was for drivers and everything else there.

We were taken to the respective barracks and presented to the Commanders of our squads.
Those indicated free bunk beds in the koobriks of the empty barracks because at that time of day the company personnel was working on construction sites in the city... 

There hardly could be found more disgusting sounds in all the living nature than the cursed command ‘company! get up!’

(...anticipatorily, I should confess that I myself when being an on-duty serviceman and having waited for the hands in the large square clock above the watch cabinet-box to show exactly six o’clock in the morning inhaled deeply and yelled in the meanest voice I could manage:
‘Companyeeeeeeee! Get uuuuuup!’
Eye for an eye.
An ear for the tortured ear…) 

After the first night in the barracks of the first company in the cabinet-box of the koobrik, I slept in of all my personal belongings there remained only a pack of razor blades ‘Neva' priced 25 kopecks. 
The disappearance of the toothbrush and cream together with the razor shaving machine was not so depressing as the disappearance of 30 kopecks from the pocket in my cotton pants. 
That was enough for two packs of cigarettes ‘Prima’.
I recollected the guys from Dnepropetrovsk picking up cigarette butts from the trash pit in the ‘training’ barrack gazebo.

Having meticulously covered my bed with the blanket (otherwise, the on-duty serviceman would rip it off and demand to do it better) I threw the army waffle towel around my neck as everyone else around and went to the Sorteer in the general flow of khaki color. 
Over each of the ten hole-ochcos, someone was squatting there attended by a waiting line of two or three and even the wall-width-long urinal runnel was not accessible at once. 
There was a babel of tinkling, farting and exchanging news of the past day. 
‘He was rat-arsed then?’
‘You knows yoursel.’
‘Got caught?’
‘I am fucked if I know. They were looking for him.' 
‘He’ll get caught.’
‘You knows yoursel.’

At the washstand trough, they milled the same piece of news but in detail. 

By eight o'clock the on-duty sergeants had driven the ‘youngs' and ‘dippers' of their companies to the drill ground and carried out the complex of exercises. 
The companies had had their breakfast and got loosely lined, four rows deep, on the drill ground except for those ‘grandpas'  who fucking fucked all falling-ins. 

At a little to eight, the ‘goat'-Willis of the Battalion Commander and a small bus with the officers and accountants pulled up at the Gate. 
The Battalion Commander, the Political Second-in-command, aka Zampolit, and the Chief of Staff went to the middle of the drill ground, the officers joined the lines of their respective companies, the accountants bypassed the barrack of the third company heading to the barrack of the fourth – half of that building was the Staff of VSO-11. 
The Dispensing got started.

The on-duty officer reported to the Commanders that during the last day there were no incidents or violations in the Construction Unit 11. 
The Chief of Staff ordered two soldiers from the Third Company to step out and face the ranks. 
The day before they violated military discipline at the construction sites in the city.
He announced the penalty – ten days of arrest.

The gray-haired Battalion Commander, turning his horn-rimmed glasses from side to side started his prosecution harangue.
His oratories were beyond the comprehension because of his brain marasmus – getting to the middle of a sentence he jumped to another of which though too no more than a half was produced.
Behind the Battalion Commander's back, the Separate Company was approaching along the asphalt path on their way to the Canteen for their breakfast havvage. 
They fucking fucked all that Dispensing, they were the Separate Company not belonging to VSO-11.

Finally, Zampolit told the Battalion Commander that was enough for the rhetoric.
The Batallion Commander fired off a pair of concluding 'fucks' and shut up.
The on-duty officer passed his responsibilities to another officer who’d stand on duty for the following twenty-four hours.
The discipline violators surrendered their belts to the new on-duty sergeant and plodded to the Check-Point house where there would be locked up in the clink, the dark room with the tin paneled door and no windows at all but with decking of planks to lie upon. 
The Chief of Staff ordered to march to our workplaces. 

We walked to the Gate with the truck already waiting for us behind it.
The Battalion Commander started up – a shred of a sentence that had slipped off when he was at it landed back into Colonel Lieutenant's brain  
Fuck yourself, fucker! The Dispensing’s over!

We’re already boarding the trucks – a foot on the wheel, hands grabbing the back plank-side, swing over it and rush further so that the next one wouldn’t land on you.
Off we go!
 The Gate stayed behind.
The wall of white brick panels between the white brick pillars ran by on the left.
We’re going to the city!.

In the end, it turned out to be a suburb with the construction site in the remnants of a forest belt. 
A nine-story residential building of two sections. 
The walls laid of white silicate brick had been raised to the fifth story level.

The Commander of our team-squad ordered to stack bricks on pallets from the brick heap piled high by the dump trucks. 

The pallet was four thick planks one meter twenty of length nailed to a pair transverse beams of ninety by six by six centimeters, which became the pallet’s footing so that the steel cable slings of the tower crane would easily pass under the pallet.
Twelve courses 300 bricks made for about one cubic meter of masonry, but the bricks should be stacked on a pallet retaining the bond pattern so that the pallet load wouldn’t pour down when the crane hoisted it to the bricklayers up the walls.

In fact, the job was not too hard, but it turned out that silicate dust gnawed into palms’ skin and they did not give us protective canvas mittens.
Grisha Dorfman plaintively observed his hands.
Besides, the white dust clung to our boots and tunics and was hard to shake off, but they did not give us any overalls. 

The same truck took us back to the Detachment for the midday meal.
The passers-by on the sidewalks did not care to look at the conbatists in a passing truck.
Outside the city where we turned from the highway a little off of the road to the Detachment there stood a clump of industrial buildings.
The buddies from our team-squad started yelling and waving in that direction like football fans when their team enters the field.
Vitya Strelyany reluctantly explained that was a zone there.
Now, that’s clear – solidarity.

(...30% of the servicemen in the construction battalions were the citizens who had served their time in prison for not too serious crimes. 
The majority of remaining 70% were considered fit for non-combatant military service because of their health conditions or, like me, were not smart enough to dodge out of the army. 
At the rare bubbles of clarity from his chronic brain marasmus, our Battalion Commander was able to give out clear-cut definitions:
‘The rabble of cripples and jail-birds, fuck the whore of your mother!’..)

From work, we were brought already at dusk.
The Evening Check after the supper was conducted by the Company Commander Captain Pissak.
The servicemen fell into two ranks divided into two formations by the cabinet-box at the entrance to the barracks. 
The ‘youngs’ (so was the law) filled the front rank.
Facing the soldiers, Captain Pissak called the roll without looking up from the list, just listening to the responses. 
‘Here!’
‘Here!’
‘Here!’
He could determine the current state of a serviceman by the voice timbre used for that ‘Here!’

When the roll call reached the ‘youngs', Pissak was approaching and standing against each of the new ‘Here!' and for a few seconds silently probed your face with an unblinking gaze from under the black visor of his forage cap. 
Then he called out the next one.
That was enough – his photographic memory had remembered you for two years ahead and a month later, instead of:
‘What’s your name, private?’
He would say:
‘Private Ogoltsoff!’
‘Yes, Comrade Captain!’
‘Are you thief-swaggering?’
‘No, Comrade Captain!’
‘Then why your belt plate is dropped to your balls? Sergeant Batochkin!’
‘Yes, Comrade Captain!’
‘Five fatigues to private Ogoltsoff.’
‘Yes, Comrade Captain!’
Well, yes, when we were approaching the nine-story building I loosened the belt over my tunic a bit.
How could I know he would pop up from the forest belt?.

That day I tried my best to curry favor with the sergeant.
He sent me to plane the ground with a spade for laying the curbstones. 
How I was fucking it!
Two hundred meters if not more.
Maybe the sergeant, seeing my zeal, would blink at the fatigues?

‘Two conbatists full of vigor
Can dig more than a power digger...' 

Two passers-by on the nearby sidewalk were so impressed with my working style that approached me inviting to partake in drinking wine from the bottle they were carrying.
‘No. Thank you! I cannot.’

At the evening check, the sergeant beckoned to me with his finger – ‘on the floors!' 
‘On the floors’ meant – after all would lie down in their bunk beds, you sweep the aisle and the passages in the koobriks, bring water from the washstand by the sorteer and do the wet cleaning of the entire sixty-seven-meter long barracks with its koobriks and the vestibule.
Do it in two steps: first with a thoroughly wet rag, then wash it, squeeze dry and repeat Step One.
And the oftener you change the water, the better so that there remained no dimmed spots in the floors.
Then report to the on-duty sergeant to check the job done.
And if he accepted it at once, you could retreat and rejoice that that evening you were not sent ‘on the floors' to the Canteen. 
Climb into your bunk bed and the moment your head touched the pillow you’ll hear:
‘Companyeeeeee! Get uuuup!’

‘They took Vanya to the nuthouse.' 
‘What Vanya?’
‘You knows yoursel. Scar on the pate.’
‘What for?’
‘Did not get up in the morning. Says mice crawled into his boots.’
‘Dodging or fucked in the head?’
‘Who fucking knows? They will check.’

The first day off we had in August.
Till then from half-past eight till twilight they kept us slavering on construction sites. 
And suddenly – a whole Sunday in the Detachment.
The ‘youngs’ washed their dusted uniforms.
They placed the washing on the brick wall and roamed around in black underpants and white tank-shirts and kirza boots, like those sports Fritzes in the movie ‘One chance in a thousand’.

During the period till the first day off our team-squad dropped the habit of saluting with screams and whistles the zone by the roadside.
And in fine morning weather didn't stop in our tracks anymore to stare before the breakfast at the faraway wonder – the snow-clad top of the Elbrus Mountain hovering in the sky over the pigsty. 
Private Alimonov, aka Alimosha, taught me to smoke a butt of cigarette ‘Prima’ shared by buddies until there remained three millimeters of the tobacco wrapping paper...

And one time we even got paid.
The master sergeant of the First Company, a gray-haired man under fifty, well imbibed, called us one by one to his ware-room and meted out one rouble plus kopecks to each, adding a piece of white cloth for for under-collars, a pair of shoe polish tins, and a spool of threads for sewing the under-collars up. 
But in the payroll, we had signed for three roubles and eighty kopecks because of everyone knew, whoever you would ask, that the Soviet Army serviceman monthly payment was 3 rub. 80 kop.
That was as indisputable an axiom as that of the Volga River and the Caspian Sea.

Midsummer, at one of the evening checks the company zampolit announced that my wife, at her request, was sent a paper certifying that I was in the army. 

‘You did not say you were married, Goly!' 
‘You hadn’t asked.’

(...they had no time for marriage doing their stretch in the penitentiary colonies for juvenile offenders… )

Olga, Konotop, the Plant, dances seemed to be something unreal, from another faraway life.
I was receiving letters from her.

“...and in the evenings when I see how girls are walking with their guys and I am all alone and by myself it hurts so that I am crying...”

Mother also sent letters to me, and brother and sister wrote a couple of times as well.
I did not know what to write in response.
‘Hello, I’ve received your letter, many thanks for it..’
And then? What else to write?
‘...in two winters, in two summers...’?
Nothing entered my head.
And I already couldn't think a shortest thought without ‘fuck’ and ‘fucking’ within it.
A fucking dickhead!
Just to think of it – my closest kin people and that feeling of detachedness in me.

Detachedness?

Well, something alike to what I felt when in the end of the day we were already sitting in the back of a truck under the white wall of the unfinished nine-story building and waited for a ‘grandpa' bricklayer changing into his uniform. 
Some other ‘grandpa’, already in the back, began to get at Misha Khmelnitsky—just so, to idle the time—for his being a Khokhol, aka a Ukrainian.
Misha, looking aside, muttered that he was not a Ukrainian and only had that kind of the last name. 
We all sat in silence.
The ‘grandpa’ started to laugh – what a lousy draft they brought from Ukraine with not a single Khokhol.
‘Okay, I’m a Ukrainian, so what of that?’
Only when those words somehow echoed back from the brick wall looming whitish in the twilight I realized that it was said by me.
It’s strange to hear yourself from outside if you did not expect that.
Some kind of self-detachedness.
The ‘gradpa’ shut up.
And really – what of that? Or of anything else?.

Later Misha Khmelnitsky revealed to me that he was also married and he even shared some intimate details that he always had an itch to take a leak into his wife’s cunt after he cum, just for fun, but it never came out.
Making no comments, I rejoiced in my mind that the evolution process of the homo sapiens species anticipated an anatomical mechanism to prevent fucking jokes of such fucked in the head funny fuckers.

Of course, my comrades in arms did not know such words as ‘evolution’ or ‘sapiens’ but they could retell from memory certain articles from the book of the Criminal Code.
‘And what had you got locked up for?’
‘Article six hundred seventeen, part two with aggravating circumstances.’
‘Brain-fucker, you! There’s no such article!.’
‘Was recently introduced – for cannibalism.’

It turned out that tattoo was not just an ornamental decoration, but an esoteric message for the initiated – of what crime convicted, how far had got advanced in the Zone Table of Ranks the wearer of the tattooed skin. 
And those with life terms were doing tattoos on their forehead running ‘Slave of the USSR'. 

But then again, not all were the same.
I saw a guy who came after his term in Zone with neat three words on his forearm in quite a modest typeface –  “in vino veritas’.
With such a tattoo one could pass off for a Doctor of Philosophy.
Some fucking Latinist...

There were certain taboos too.
A try to exaggerate personal achievements of the tattoo bearer or to unlawfully add to his status in the criminal milieu by means of pics he was not entitled to, called for a severe, brutal—at times the capital—punishment. 
