
And one should be careful about using the word ‘waffles’.
After we got that payment, Alimosha visited the Military Store at the Gate and pointing his finger at a pack of waffles told the saleswoman:
‘Gimme of those grid biscuits.’
But the trick did not save him.
‘Hey, Alimosha! Got missing waffles, eh?' 
‘Go and fuck yourself!’ snapped Alimosha back.
The innocent word of ‘waffles’ had got polluted with the meaning ‘cum’, thence the pun.

(...and how not to come to admiration, not to arose emotionally from the unpretentiously artless but so poetically provocative mocking couplet-duels of the Zone folklore?

‘I have fucked you at the gate,
And can present a certificate!..’

‘I have fucked you in grass dew,
Here’s a reference for you!..’

‘I have fucked you in raspberries
Together with your references!..' 

And, putting the final victorious period:

‘Nothing to parry with? No ace?
Grab my dick and wipe your face!..’…)

Besides play on words there happened and practical jokes, of course.

After the midday meal, we were standing by the Gate waiting for the truck. 
Sasha Khvorostyuk and Vitya Strelyany had razor-shaved their heads the night before and stood out among us with white-skinned pates above their densely tanned mugs.
‘I say, would I look like a dick with a scratch across my pate now?’ Vitya asked me.
‘No worry, buddy, you look that without any scratch.’
‘Do me a favor, grab my ears and jerk it. Please, Oh, please!’
Who would refuse so earnest appeal of a buddy?
Naturally, I did as asked.
‘Ptui-ptui-ptui-ptui...’
I did not understand at once – the white saliva of tiny spits dribbled on my tunic chest.
‘I’ve cum...’ explained Vitya.

The truck pulled up by the check-point with a team-squad of plasterers of our draft but from Dnepropetrovsk.
They walked through the open gate.
Five ‘dippers’ shot from the check-point door besetting a mighty ‘young’ like a pack of wolves hunting a bull.
But no, he turned out a too hard prey for them and the pack retreated uttering threats.
The bull picked up his cap knocked off in the skirmish.
We kept the policy of non-interference to the internal affairs of the third company.
The driver of the arrived truck honked us to climb into the back...

The walls of the nine-story building were laid even at night under a garland of electric bulbs suspended above the wall portion in progress.
Two soldiers from our draft were transferred to the night shift – a lanky buddy who worked as a bricklayer before the army and me. 
He was at once integrated into the line of the servicemen laying the wall and I got a shovel to bring the mortar, aka ‘dirt’, from a nearby iron box.

The tower crane with an indistinguishable face of the soldier-operator in his cab under the crane-beam loomed motionless in the dark of night behind the wall. 
The bricklayers entreated the operator to hoist a kettle of drinking water for them but he was too lazy to go all the way down the ladder inside the crane's tower and then climb back. 
And there was no one down there to fill the kettle with water from the water pipe by the mound of mortar on the ground. 
Finally, one of the bricklayers climbed on a pallet with bricks, grabbed the steel cables of the ‘spider' (the bundle of four steel cables) and stepped onto two of its hooks hanging by idly. 
The operator switched on the rumbling noise of his crane, raised and turned away the beam carrying the figure standing on the hooks far down where a lonely light-bulb was burning by the mortar mound. 

Safety regulations?
The royal troops lived by the concepts of their own.

From below the crane brought a pallet of bricks with the kettle on top.
The pallet was put by the wall between the working bricklayers and they commanded the operator to take the cables away.
One of the spider’s hooks caught the ‘young’ bricklayer stooping over the wall with a trowel in his hand by the belt strapped over his pea jacket and lifted him into the air.
The rise was not too high – about a meter or so, because of the whistles and cries from the others to put him back down.
The operator executes the command and the incident was over, but what did the fellow felt hanging up in the air and kicking his long legs and shouting ‘enough! enough!'? 

(...probably, it happened just by chance, because the ‘grandpas’ in the line were also shouting ‘down!’ to the operator…)

Then the bricklayers' sergeant-foreman went to the far corner of the erected section, stood on the wall edge and took a leak down onto the distant remains of the forest belt with an arc-shaped squirt dashed by gleams reflecting the lights of the bulb-garland. 

‘Nothing gives a nicer sight
Than pissing from the hight..’

He jumped off the corner and joined the bricklayers' line to go on with laying the wall... 

Though not always everyone easily got off with anything.

Two soldiers grabbed each other in a mock-wrestling over the elevator shaft.
Or rather, the bigger guy grabbed the smaller one.
Hefty yokels are more prone to the like fun. 

They both fell into the shaft and broke through the safety boarding one story lower.
Due to the law of acceleration of bodies in free fall, the bigger one was the first to reach the bottom of the shaft and got flattened against the piles of construction debris down there.
The smaller guy came a second later landing on the gone off joker and got off with heavy fractures.
After the rehabilitation, he was not exempted though and served until his demobilization as a watchman at various construction sites of VSO-11... 

Every other month at the Morning Dispensing they were reading the circulation orders about servicemen killed as a result of malicious violations of safety regulations in the military construction units of the Baku Air Defense District, which our construction battalion reported to...

All the ‘youngs’ at the beginning of their service get ‘burdened’ but our squad was the ‘youngest’ of all the ‘youngs’.
Such situation resulted from a chain of unfavorable circumstances.

The ensign, who was our platoon commander, caught the sergeant, who was our squad commander, with two bottles of wine bought from a nearby deli.

What is ensign?
That’s a ‘grandpa’ who liked thief-swaggering (wow! the ‘youngs’ got cold feet before him!) and who realized that after the demobilization, in the civilian life, he’d be nothing.

(...the civilian life has other kinds of hierarchies…)

That’s why such a ‘grandpa’ remains in the army for a long-term service.
After four months of training at a school of ensigns, he comes back to the same detachment with a small star in his shoulder straps. 
He wears the parade-crap, he roughs the soldiers, and he gets paid for it one hundred twenty rubles a month.
How not to sympathize with a person who has found his place in life?

So, our squad was called to and collected from different places in the nine-story building construction site—some of us were laying partition walls, others digging a trench, still, others loading bricks on pallets—and ordered to fall in by the entrance to the second section. 
Our sergeant was facing the line without his belt—an obvious sign of being under the arrest—two bottles of wine (0.5 liters, wide red sticker) by his feet on the ground. 
The fair-haired ensign in a short-sleeved parade-crap shirt (the summer had just started) took the position at the flank of our dust-covered-dirt-smeared formation.

In short, that whelp, who was not even a ‘grandpa’ already, decided to perform a didactic oratorio.
Like, this traitor of the homeland treacherously left his comrades in arms at their labor post and deserted to the grocery store, but the vigilant ensign caught him red-handed.

He finished his righteous bullshit, snuffed and didn’t know what to do next.

However, he seemed to have watched some TV serial from the life of military cadets where someone got a parcel mailed from home and ate it on the sly without sharing to other cadets.
Then he got caught and the cadet school zampolit forced him to eat a bar of chocolate in front of the rank of his comrades.
The miser with his head bowed, burning with shame, implored to forgive him.
End of the sequel.

And so, that Pestalozzi with a single star in his shoulder straps started to peacock himself for the TV zampolit before us:
‘And you let your comrades down for wine! Well, well… Then drink it!' 

He did not consider that in real life movies might go the way not foreseen by the screenplay...
Instead of bowing his head the sergeant threw it back and clapped the bottle's neck to his lips executing the received order.
The ensign froze in his place, our rank sympathetically swallowed along with the sergeant's gulps and the bottle was finished at one go.
He did not have time for the second though – the ensign sprinted to it and smashed against a heap of gravel. 
The sergeant was taken to the detachment and locked up in the clink at the check-point house.
Next morning he was busted to a private and sent to the team he was working with before they brought our draft to VSO-11.
And might it be otherwise?
Who would allow him to kick back in the clink for ten days and chew the bread for nothing?
March to work!
After all, even without the tattoo on the forehead all of us were slaves of the USSR...

Our squad got a new commander, an ordinary ‘dipper’, by the name of Prostomolotov.
‘Call me simply – Molotov.’

An intellectual wearing glasses, he knew about Molotov, but he was nothing more than a ‘dipper’ and though they gave him the rank of lance-corporal the ‘grandpas’ were pushing him around and he was in cold sweat before them and never hinted to ‘burden’, at least occasionally, some other squad of ‘youngs’.

For that reason, after a day's work instead of going to bed, we went to the kitchen and peeled potatoes to feed the next day the entire servicemen personnel plus that of the Separate Company. 
All night long. 
Until five in the morning.
True, the last sack potatoes we smuggled out to the garbage bins covering the buckets with potato peels.
And at six ‘get up!’, then the Morning Dispensing and to work.

Or else, they brought us in the evening from work to eat the havvage and then took back to the nine-story building because KAMAZ trucks were moving there alabaster from the railway station and if it rained the whole carload of the valuable building material would be lost.
And we, standing knee-deep in loose alabaster, drove it with shovels into the basement of the nine-story building through the opening in the blocks of the foundation under the end wall. 
As soon as we finished one hillock of it, another KAMAZ truck would come and dump its load, and then another and then another…
And inside the basement the alabaster had also be driven into the next compartment, otherwise, all of it wouldn't fit in. 

(...I will not forget the cyanotic complexion of Vasya, drafted from Buryn, in the light of the basement bulb when he fell asleep on an alabaster dune…) 

In short, Simply-Molotov, the conbat saying was right:
‘It's better to have a prostitute daughter, than a lance-corporal son.' 

Dad of Grisha Dorfman arrived and had a talk with someone in the Staff barrack.
He left and Grisha was transferred to the Fourth Company and given the position of a tailor.
Soon, Grisha already flaunted in ‘Pe-Sha’ and didn’t even spent nights in the barracks because he had a sewing workshop in the bathhouse.
‘Pe-Sha’ meant ‘half-woolen outfit’ the cloth is thicker than cotton, aka ‘Khe-Be’, and was the color of dark swampy slime – one of the khaki shades.
‘Pe-Sha’ was worn by aristocrat-servicemen: the driver of the Battalion Commander’s ‘goat’-Willis, or the projectionist at the Club, who was also the postman.
It’s a great thing to have a dad who knows how to negotiate.

And Vanya, who feared the mice in his boots, got exempted from the army.
The sergeant who escorted him home from the nuthouse told that at the Stavropol station Vanya threw the mesh-bag with his belongings wrapped in a newspaper to the floor and shouted:
‘Run! Run away! It’s a bomb! It’s ticking!’
People shied away.
And when they arrived at Vanya’s home he said for a goodbye:
‘Learn, sergeant, the way smart guys serve in the army.' 

That’s, in general, why on that day-off in August trying to go off the lazy crowd of beach-lizards in kirza boots, I turned at the Club corner and from the rebar grated window, next to the back porch under the door to the projectionist’s, I heard an acoustic guitar.
Guitar…

I stood still and listened, though there was nothing to listen to – someone clumsily tried to play the chords of ‘Shyz-Gara’ but it did not go well with the rhythm – he used a balalaika beat.
I could not stand it and went back to the Club main door. 
It was open.
At the end of the hall on both sides of portholes from the projectionist's, there were two doors. 
The left one stood wide open and it was where the guitar sounded from.

The grated window in a narrow room by was abutted by a level hospital couch with a beast-shaped soldier in a beakless aft cap, black overalls, and slippers. 
He had a guitar in his hands.
Another soldier, also in slippers, sat opposite him on a chair with its back against the wall. 
‘What the fuck you need here?’
‘It’s from ‘Shocking blue’ that you wanna play. I can show.’
They exchanged glances.
‘Well, show me.’

(... "beauty will save the world..."? 
Well, no one can know for certain.
It’s too painfully vague a thing – beauty.
Music is something more tangible.
It can do wonders and work miracles.
Create bridges.
Throw away all unnecessary.

Instead of a ‘pheasant' Zameshkevich, a ‘dipper' Rassolov, a ‘salaga' Ogoltsoff there remained just three young guys passing the guitar from hands to hands…) 

A couple of days later Sasha Roodko of Dnepropetrovsk knocked in the tin-covered door with his fingers eaten by plastering lime ‘dirt'. 
The Musician Alexander Roodko.
A bass guitarist.
In his civilian life, he worked at the regional Philharmonia.


That is how the creation of the VIA Orion started in our construction battalion based on the equipment and instruments left after the servicemen of the previous drafts.
The guys went to the Stuff barracks, they talked to the Zampolit of the VSO-11.
Sasha Roodko was appointed Director of the Club.
But he never got himself a ‘Pe-Sha’ outfit and he spent nights in the barracks of the Second Company and stood at the evening checks there.

He knew the musical notation.
He played on anything that would turn up.
He taught us the warming-up chant ‘mi-me-ma-mo-mu’ and he blinked, painfully and mutely, with his dull blue gaze at my crap at singing.
He had a big nose constantly swollen with rhinitis, and he burred.
But he was a Musician.

And I started to lead a double life.
After the working day and havvage at the Canteen, I was taking the left turn, to the Club...

‘May I join the ranks, Comrade Master Sergeant?’
‘Why late for the evening check, Ogoltsoff?’
‘I was at the Club.’
‘And what do you, Club-goers, exercise there?’
There sounded some giggling in the ranks supportive of the hint.
‘We exercise solfeggio there, Comrade Master Sergeant.’
The Commanders face stupidly stiffened.
He’d never heard such words in his life.
The giggling in the ranks increased but in the opposite direction.
‘The Battalion Zampolit is aware of it, Comrade Master Sergeant.’
‘Get to the ranks, suffle.. sulge... Son of a bitch!' 

And during the working day, I was as anyone else. 
We were transferred to the five-story building construction site in its concluding ante-delivery phase.
Vitya Novikov and Valik Nazarenko called me to an empty apartment.
We shared a bottle of wine from its neck.
A forgotten buzz.
Everything was gone before the evening check.
Yes, because what was there for three of us?


At the evening check, Captain Pissak sent the on-duty soldier to the Dishwashers' to fetch a washed-up cup for breath alcohol testing. 
As he moved along the rank, Pissak handed the cup to a soldier he cared to check with the order to exhale into it.
Two servicemen had already been ordered out of the ranks and face about.
When he handed the cup to me I realized that I was fucked because I was given out even before the test by the waves of heat and cold rolling in turn over me.
For the loosened belt on my outfit he ordered me five fatigues and now I was fucked completely.
Pissak sniffed from the cup and, sadistically looking aside, announced:
‘Well, I say, if a soldier hasn’t drunk you can see it at once.’

After the evening check, Vitya Strelyany told me with a smile: 
‘You were whiter than the fucking wall.’
As if I did not know that myself!
Pissak, bastard! What the fucking cat and mouse?

It’s hard to believe, but there came another day-off.
In the evening they showed a movie.
Some Polish film ‘The anatomy of love’ it was with certain hints at eroticism.
Maybe in Poland, there were more than just hints but until it got to us it had been shortened by repeated cut-outs. 
There was a whole pack with scissors, starting from the censorship down to acned projectionists snatching out whole pieces of film wherever there flashed bare tits in a frame.
For special friends and personal use.
Fucking morons.

The next morning in the line of leak-takers over the runnel in the sorteer I gave my dick the final shake and buttoning the fly up silently addressed it in my mind, amidst the general din:
‘That’s it, buddy. You’re just to be a drain cock for the two years.’

At work, we were removing construction debris and excess earth out of the basement with the stretchers. 
It’s called ‘to do planning’.
All of us kept sullen silence after that Polish film.
In a smoke break I, having nothing better to do, began to get at Alimosha.
He did not answer or briefly told me to fuck off and then suddenly jumped to his feet and pounced at me with his fists. 
I had to brush off as best I could.
Yet, to put it frankly, I’d never been proficient at the activity.

Then Prostomolotov dropped into the basement and shouted to stop and we again took up the stretchers.
I did a couple of walks and noticed that the pain in my right hand was not going to cease. 
My thumb was out of order after an awkward hit against the Alimosha’s Tatar-Mongolian mug.
 
The next morning the whole hand was swollen and after the Morning Dispensing the Assistant Paramedic from the Detachment Medical Unit (that same villager from our draft, but already in ‘Pe-Sha' outfit) took me to the Stavropol Military Hospital. 
We reached the city on some team-squad truck and there got on a bus because for soldiers city public transport was for free.
When we arrived at the hospital he told me to wait and entered some of the buildings.
The grounds looked quite attractive with a thick garden of yellow plum.
Yet I did not have the appetite for them because of the aching hand. 
Sitting on a bench near the building I fell asleep.

I opened my eyes to see a round muzzle with long cat-like mustaches right against my nose.
I started but the bench backrest safely kept me from falling. 
Another glance disclosed Captain’s shoulder straps on the cat.
Everything became clear – seeing a sleeping soldier on the bench he stooped for the alcohol breath test.

Then my escort came out and led me to another building for a check.
They twirled my thumb and I hissed like a gander and slapped my other hand, like a broken wing, against my side.
They diagnosed a bone fracture, bandaged the hand, plastered it with gypsum and left me in the hospital.
Thank you, Alimosha!
But washing the face with one hand turned out rather inconvenient.

What could be better than a fracture?
No jabs at all, just kick back and wait until the bone tissue grows over.
In the dining room, there were square tables for four persons and chairs – no benches. 
The havvage was much better than in our Canteen.
Quite understandable, though, because the hospital treated officers as well. 
Of course, all wore pajamas with no insignia only the wards for officers were on the second floor and for soldiers in the basement.
What’s the difference where to sleep?
Especially when the dining room was nearer to us – at the end of the corridor.

The hospital was far from being overcrowded.
In my ward, apart from me and a Georgian named Rezo, there were four vacant beds.
The Rezo's black hair was long enough to be combed back, obviously a ‘grandpa'. 
He held his left arm pressed tightly against his chest. 
The result of his work as a driver at the wheat harvesting.
In the field camp, he started fooling around with the cook and her husband stabbed him in the back with a large kitchen knife. 
The cook kept visiting him at the hospital.
They usually went into the thick garden and Rezo came back with yellow plums in the pocket of his pajamas jacket.
He offered them to me but I had no appetite.

The neighbor ward was full though.
One of the patients had been serving in our construction battalion.
He’s also a ‘grandpa’ but a Russian, named Sanya.
He had fair hair and his right brow was missing, licked off with a flat scar.
He was a driver too and went AWOL by his tractor and collided somewhere with something or, maybe, rolled over.
They had to amputate both his legs above the knees. 

He did not visit the dining room.
They guys from his ward were bringing the havvage directly to him, although he had crutches and a pair of high prostheses next to his bed.
On the front cover of ‘The Rural Life' magazine, he saw the picture of a shock worker of Communist labor from Stavropol against the background of her combine harvester and wheat ears and started writing letters to her. 
‘Hello, unknown Valentina...’

Sometimes his fellow drivers from our conbat visited him.
After their visits, he screamed songs and quarreled with the on-duty medical personnel. 
But he got off with it because he was to be exempted from the army anyway...

There was a library on the second floor.
Only by its name; two shelves filled with translations from Chinese about how socialism was being built in the Chinese village. 
The books were printed in the 50s’ before the exposure of the personality cult at the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU.
That is before Mao Tse-Tung took offense for disparaging his bosom friend Marshal Stalin and in both great powers they stopped singing: 

‘Moscow – Beijing,
Eternal friendship...’

And what would you do when left with no choice?
You go and read social realism masterpieces in the best tradition of the newspaper ‘Renmin Ribao’.
