
A commotion broke up in the next ward splashing out into the corridor – the combine driver Valentina answered Sanya’s letters with her live visit.
She got seated in the yard, on a bench under a tree.
A swarthy faced woman of Moldavian type, beautiful as movie stars from the first Soviet color movies about collective farms in the Cossack villages.
The most handsome guy from the neighbor ward alighted by her side with explanations that Sanya would presently come from a procedure. 

And Sanya, in hysterical jitters was fastening his prostheses sitting on his bed in the ward.
They helped to pull his pajamas pants over and sticking two crutches under his armpits he clumsily dragged his body to the exit.
But Valentina—well done!—for whole three minutes she sat next to him on the bench nearest to the entrance. 
Then the same handsome guy led her along the shortcut path to the unofficial exit through a hole in the fence... 

Two days later along the same path…
I looked and I couldn’t get it…
It just couldn’t be!
But who else is that if not Olga?!
Yes, it’s her!

The same evening I went with her to the park in her trousers and some kind of a turtleneck.
And she, of course, had a mini skirt on.
At the Dance Floor, a pack of local yobbos started to close in, probably,  attracted by the big yellow flowers pattern in my borrowed pants. 
Two ‘dippers’ on AWOL from our conbat had identified me and approached.
One was in the civilian and the second in a ‘Pe-Sha’ outfit.
I didn’t even know their names.
The locals got it that the construction battalion was having a pleasure-walk and dissolved. 

Olga had a heap of news in her life.
She again had moved to Theodosia and in the day nursery, there were no places for babies. 
She took Lenochka and went to the city executive committee on the chairman's reception day. 
He repeated the same thing – there were no places and that’s it.
Then she just put Lenochka on his desk and left.
He ran after her to the stairs,
‘Citizen! Take your baby!’
In short, they found a place.
Her mother was looking after Lenochka while she went to Stavropol, only in the train they stole all her money.
And my engagement ring was also gone.
But it had happened still in Konotop.
She was wearing it on her finger though it was too wide and doing washing she did not notice that it slipped off into the basin and she splashed it away with the soapy water into the drain pit.

The next day she borrowed money for traveling back from the cook who was just visiting Rezo and walked away down the same shortcut path.
They took the plaster off my hand and I was discharged...

I went to the south-eastern outskirt of Stavropol and from ring road there walked under the tall trees bordering the highway to Elista towards the Demino fork. 
Bright yellow leaves lay here and there on the roadside.
The sun was shining but it felt like it was autumn.
But when was the summer?

One of the conbat trucks pulled up on the highway.
The driver shouted to me:
‘Home?’
I said yes, home, and jumped into the truck back. 
Because neither from work nor from AWOLs we never returned ‘to the Detachment', or ‘to the barracks'. 
We returned home.

At home, it wasn't without news too. 
During my absence, our squad survived the rampage of hazing in the hands of ‘grandpas'. 
After the lights out they were taken out to the drill ground and made walk ‘goose step’ in a circle.
And they had been beaten not once.
Karlookha from the Second Company was particularly atrocious – he jabbed a ‘young’ with a knife not to stab, but prick.
And he himself was just a dwarf, half a head lower than normal growth.
Then in the basement of the 50-apartment block, he rush with his knife on Sehrguey Chernenko, aka Gray, from Dnepropetrovsk. 
But Gray had his Zone skills for such incidents and knocked him out.

Karlookha thief-swaggered only on the grounds of being a ‘grandpa' but the ‘grandpas' from his draft who had done their time before the army hadn't supported him against Gray. 
So everything, like, subsided but the tension remained.

On the wave of that tension, some ‘pheasant' clung to me, 
‘Are you from thieves?’
Saying ‘yes' to that question you had to answer for your words but for me, the articles of the Criminal Code were as closed a book as the formulas from Organic Chemistry. 
I said ‘no' and he took me to the Leninist room and began to shear my hair in ‘like-a-zero' style with a hand-held machine – the hair length was too arrogant for a ‘young'. 
I did not mind, it had two years ahead to grow back.
Only the machine was blunt and a couple of times pulled very painfully.

There was a plasterer from the Third Company in the Leninist Room who came to see his fellow-countrymen – Armenians.
And he suggested the ‘pheasant’ to let him finish my haircut.
The ‘pheasant’ himself was not happy already that he started that job and yielded the machine to him.
In short, Robert Zakarian did my haircut and when the machine jammed he said ‘I am sorry’.
I had already forgotten that such words existed.

Later he started visiting the Club and became a vocalist of the Orion.
He had the purest Russian pronunciation because he grew up in the north.
His father was convicted of dissidence or something of the sort and put to a camp in the north.
Then he was paroled to ‘chemistry' in the same north and Robert's mother moved there too with Robert and his younger brother. 
With his stretch completed, Robert’s father applied for emigration of his family from the Soviet Union.
Two years passed and he died before the permission was given.
There was some time before the fixed date of their departure and Robert went to have a rest in the seaside city of Sochi. 
There he met a girl Valya from the Tula city and fell in love.
They exchanged their addresses and when Robert returned to the north he announced that he would not go anywhere from the Soviet Union.

But the papers had been already drawn up for the whole family and if he refused his mother and brother would not be let out too.
The brother tried to make him understand the situation by fighting him, yet Robert remained uncompromising.
Then the mother began to regularly cry and he went with them to Paris to their relatives because of whose invitation they were let out.
In Paris, he found a job at a construction site.
He did not know the language, he had no friends and all his dreams were only of Valya from Tula.

A year later, with a tourist group from France, Robert Zakarian came to Moscow and on the very first evening he fled from his group in a hotel and scurried to Tula.
For ten days he lived there in the house of Valya's parents and then her mother persuaded him to give himself up to the authorities. 
They were simply delighted when he turned up in the Tula KGB because their bosses in Moscow were on the horn about the disappearance of a tourist from Paris. 
He was immediately taken to the airport and deported to France.

In Paris, he appealed to the Soviet Embassy requesting to let him back to the USSR to his beloved. 
Then he visited it each week and the embassy worker with a tattoo ‘Tolik' on his hand was shaking his head and announcing there was no answer to the application. 
Only a year later Tolik said that he had got a positive response.
Robert came to Tula, married Valya, they had a baby daughter and he got drafted to our construction battalion.

He liked to show a black and white photograph of his family: he himself on the left, black-haired with a serious look of wide-set eyes under the broad black eyebrows of a definitely family man; his wife Valya on the right in a white blouse and with a round face framed by fair hair; the baby-daughter in between them two in a cap of fine lace.
So the contingent of our construction battalion comprised not only cripples and jail-birds, we even had a double migrant.

On the Seventh of November, the Orion performed their first concert on the Club stage. 

The drums were knocked and kicked at by Vladimir Karpeshin, aka Karpesha.
Vladimir Rassolov and Robert Zakarian provided lead vocals.
Sasha Roodko sang along with them and played the bass guitar; I kept silent and played the rhythm guitar.

In our vocal-instrumental ensemble, there also was a horn player, Kolya Komissarenko, aka Commissar, a short, dark-haired guy from Dnepropetrovsk of a cheerfully Jewish appearance. 
He played diligently but did no better than I in singing.
Roodko was suffering but endured.
Perhaps, the presence of a horn player on stage tickled his nostalgia for his Philharmonic past. 
To hear less clam, he kept cutting the horn part shorter and shorter.

For the concert, we changed into parade-crap (three of us into that from strangers because the parade-crap was given after one year of service). 

The concert began with ‘The Wide, Wide Field’ song (sort of a patriotic one).
Roodko dreamed of making it with a vocal layout like that of the Pesnyary, but because of the limited range of the vocalists’ sound and the crappy clams from the Commissar's horn (at which he himself goggled his eyes out in sheer astonishment but still blew on) this philharmonic piece of shit was almost booed at.

However, Robert got a warm applaud for his number (sort of a lyrical one).
He performed the adaptation of the French song the air of which was year after year used by the Central Television News Program ‘Time' when announcing the weather forecast for the next day. 

‘Yes I can forgive you all
And let to the sky like a bird free of thrall...’

The servicemen of the Caucasian nationalities (mostly from the Separate Company) enthusiastically met the song ‘Eminnah’ performed by Vladimir Rassolov (sort of an Eastern-comical one).

‘Under the burka of your girlfriend
There's no girlfriend but your Grandpa. 
Uh, Eminnah!..’

And the song ‘Rain’ from the repertoire of Fofik (the Orpheuses at DK KEMZ, Konotop) was awarded a unanimous ovation (sort of a hit of the season).

However, in the oral review by Zampolit, aka the political deputy Commander of VSO-11, expressed after the concert in the close circle of musicians the final song received the lowest rating.
‘Roodko those ‘Rains’ of yours have already soaked everyone fucking through and through.’
He made a sugary-nasal voice meaning everyday pop stars:
‘Rains again… but you wait for me… no, I won’t wait… fuck off, you stupid ass-hole...’
We involuntary laughed.
That particular song had been heard by him for the first time but he accurately grasped the essence of the lyrics in the musical mass production of the kind.

‘I’ll pass through any rains
Because I’m loving you! Uh-uh!..’

And again the Commander of our team-squad was replaced.
Prostomolotov was returned to his previous squad without demotion from the lance-corporal rank though because he wasn’t caught at anything.
His clash with the ensign, the platoon commander, became the reason for the shuffle.
Most likely at some point, he incautiously did not care to hide his intellectual superiority over the ensign. 
‘Thief-swaggering’ was the conbat term to denote a behavior of the sort.

In his place came Alik Aliyev, an Azerbaijanian in a pheasantly tight outfit. 
He was a slim tall guy with a beautiful round face in which a clean thin skin tightly fitted his high cheekbones and the well-developed jaw. 
A week later he was given the rank of lance-corporal.
For that ceremonial occasion, he ordered our squad-team to fall in and delightedly announced, 
‘I would-a fuckan!’

But he somewhat hurry-scurried in his predictions and joyful anticipations.
There were no less tall but more emotionally reserved privates in our squad who quietly shared with Alik their concepts (which he understood and accepted) that if people who got to the construction battalion after doing their times in Zone still did not thief-swagger, then for him, who was honored to become a conbatist because of insufficient fluency in Russian, moderation was the correct course to survival. 
And on my personal behalf, he never meant to be mean. 
While still a private soldier, he accidentally became a witness of the case when in the Leninist Room of our Company two senior servicemen from the Orion interpreted to Prostomolotov, the then Commander of my squad-team, the postulate of the musicians being above the vanilla army relations as they determined in the Internal Service Regulations.
So we just did our job at work—digging, dragging, laying, hoisting—and after it, we got rest within the built-in limits of construction battalion life. 

Of course, we were not entitled to lie down on our beds in the koobriks before the lights-out (that was the privilege of ‘grandpas’) but then there were stools along the aisle and in the Leninist Room on which one could sit down and have a rest.
It was already too cold to go out into the gazebo by the entrance hall...

Then the winter began.
We were given hats and khaki pea jackets.
They pulled canvas tops over the truck backs by which we were taken to work and installed plank benches—from side to side—to ride sitting...

In the blue darkness of starting night our squad-team gathered after work at the foot of the nine-story building, but out truck was late.
We even walked a little to meet it on the other side of the forest belt remnants and then some hundred meters more to the empty of passers-by at such an hour sidewalk towards the distant blocks of five-story buildings.

We stood in a wide circle on the trampled snow.
Jokes, laughter, friendly jabs and claps on the shoulders – usual vivacity at the end of a usual working day before leaving for the usual havvage at the conbat Canteen. 

I was tired of listening for the hundredth time the jokes I’d heard before and walked to the light of a distant electric bulb on the end wall of the nine-story building.

(...one way to overcome the drag of time is to absorb space…)

So I plodded back, knowing that they would not leave without me as well as without the pair of ‘grandpa’-bricklayers that were changing their clothes in the nine-story building.
Boos, yells, and laughter of comrades remained behind. 
I walked in a measured step thinking of nothing.

(...such reflections are also named 'wistful soul yearnings', that is when you don't finalize your thoughts about anything specific, but still, for some reason, feel sad…) 

So I entered the remnants of the forest belt when a muffled call came from some sad and distant place.
Something called me.
I returned to here-and-now, reluctantly looked around and saw the rear side of the truck rolling on me.

I didn’t have time to jump aside only wanted to and bent my legs to push off the road.
I was saved by the tilting in the direction of the prepared jump – the impact of the rear side completed the started move and threw me under the tree and not onto the road under the rolling truck wheels.

‘We've been shouting to you so much,' said Vitya Strelyany, as we rode home. 
Well, I didn’t know.
I had heard just one call and from very far away.
My right shoulder hurt for two days. 

At the end of December, our squad-team was transferred to the multi-apartment building construction site. 
Or rather to initialization of that site.
There was just the pit for laying foundation blocks and there was a tower crane on a short ran of its tracks.
Yes, and there was a tin-roofed trailer with a door and two windows taken off its wheels and put by the pit.
We got a clear-cut task – to dig the trench for the side wall foundation blocks because the wall, as it turned out, should pass two meters closer to the trailer and not in the already excavated pit.
When digging out the foundation pit they did not take into account that the building would be sitting on the pipe providing running water for a whole city area.
Then they woke up and decided to move the building before it was started.
However, while they were figuring out this and that, winter came, frost struck and no machines were able to expand the foundation pit – the frozen ground was too hard for the excavator buckets and therefore they drove us to the rescue.

Half of the trailer was packed with new shovels and we even were given the unheard-of luxury – protective canvas mittens.
Of course, the ground was too hard and for the shovels too, breakers were the must.
And they were brought, a whole truckload of breakers, and dumped with a din by the trailer. 
Heavy, metal breakers, a meter and a half long, the only defect that they were self-made. 

At one of the local productions, they took thick rebar cut it into pieces of the needed length, hammered the ends in a smithy to make them pointed and dumped by the pit. 
However, the breaker should be smooth, that's a hand instrument. 
As for rebar, it is intended for making reinforced concrete and therefore covered with frequent oblique scars for firmer merging with the concrete. 
Those scars, though rounded, would tear any mittens after a dozen strikes with the rebar breaker against the ground and it would be rubbing the skin off even in the most calloused and hardened palms.

But if not we then who else would defend the homeland from plan making ass-holes?
Conbat will cover anything...

The wind, like a dog, broke off the chain, tumbled in helter-skelter around, snapped at the loosened ear-flaps of our hats and lashed with their strings at the face. 
Yet the main job of the wind was to drag along its current the tumbling black and gray clouds scudding as low as the cabin top of the tower crane.
Because of those clouds, all around was drowning in dusky twilight from morning to night. 
To get warm we had the trailer heated with our breath.
The mittens had long since got worn to tatters.
We grabbed the frosty rebars with found in the trailer rags.

A strike of the rebar against the ground clove off a clumsy piece of it the size of a walnut.
Then another splinter, then one more.
Your partner was standing with his back to the wind, waiting for you to knock enough to scrape them off and throw away with the shovel.
As Vitya Strelyany cared to put it:

‘We were brought to Stavropol
To dig and shovel the ground,
But it is so fucking hard, 
Harder can’t be found.’
 
(...but I entertain an unshared suspicion that it was an adaptation of a Zone stanza from the first five-year plans era turned up in the mines of Donbass...)

However, there’s a nook to be happy too – oh, how sweet is dozing when you sit on the floor in the trailer leaning your back against the backs of your comrades!

After half a day of breaking-scraping, we discovered that at the depth of half a meter plus the permafrost transformed into the ground almost as hard but yielding to the bayonet shovel. 
Three days later we developed the trench digging methodology.
If you dig a meter by meter hole two meters deep and next to it another such a hole then the two can be connected with a tunnel bridged over with the layer of frozen ground. 
The bridge is noosed with the crane slings and you will hollow out the edges of the permafrost bridge until the moment when the crane power is enough to tear off and hoist a whole block of the frozen ground. 
Aha! Fucking bitch!

Yes, the construction battalion did it!
And although there remained many days of breaking and scraping to the very end of the trench the victory was ours.
We broke the backbone of the polar night twilight that had descended as far as the city of Stavropol.

Besides the trailer, you also could shelter from the frost in the entrances to staircases of the multi-apartment block on the other side of the pit.
When not standing in the piercing wind, a cigarette could also warm you up when a passer-by in a staircase would give you one.

While I was basking in the building entrances Alimosha and Novikov explored the surrounding lands and discovered a dairy factory and a bakery plant as well. 
Just a question of climbing a pair of fencing walls.
They returned swollen like balloons with the milk cardboard pyramids of half a liter and loaves of hot bread tucked under their pea jackets.
Since that day we were sending foragers there.
The workers of both enterprises allowed you to loot directly from the production lines.

Sometimes we went out on the streets to ask money from the passers-by.
‘Bro, 27 kopecks not enough for a bottle, can you help out?' 
‘Sister, 11 kopecks for a pack of ‘Belomor’, eh?
Two days without a smoke..’

Alimosha explained the nuances to me.
Never address the pensioner oldies – no go, and they might even start to yell.
Asking for a round sum was also a mistake; instead of 27 he would give you at least 30, and instead of 11 you’d get 15 kopecks.
What the money for?
Well, instead of 9 kopeck shag or ‘Pamir’ for 11 kopecks you could buy Cuban ‘Partogas’, aka ‘the thermonuclear’, or that same ‘Prima’ again; but not Indian ‘Red and White’ – sour crap in golden candy wrappers.
And at times we drink wine too.
To drive away fatigue, to wash down the snack from the bakery plant.

Oh, how low I fell!
Begging on the streets!
And could I not die of shame?

(...well, firstly, we had a more precise term for that activity: not begging, but ‘jackalling’
And as for the shame, I’m probably a pervert.
I am more ashamed before Valya Pisanka for that paper tophat than for the coppers received in my palm from the passers-by.
If even I, at certain points, might be a noble man, but, on the whole, not a Spanish grandee – that’s for sure…)

In February the bread-and-butter carnival was over; we were transferred to the construction of the Medical Center. 
There the basement was already bridged over with concrete slabs of floors, but not completely.
Under the floor, we were building a fire of the planks we broke with breakers because there was no trailer. 
The grounds of the future Medical Center was really vast but on the outskirts with no hunting grounds for the jackalling.

The trucks for our transportation to work and back provided a local motor depot with civilian drivers.
Ours was a hairy asshole.
He flew into the grounds of the Center on his UAZ, beat on the breaks and the truck glided along the icing, turned around and stopped – get in, off we go!
During the trick, the tattered, not fully fixed canvas top quacked and bubbled like a parachute in arms of a landed saboteur. 
The driver grinned his bad-teeth smile from under his thin mustache – he was in high spirits from that sort of gypsy romanticism. 
The exhaust pipe of his truck could give out loud bangs but he withheld the fun for the passage along the city sidewalks – to rough the passers-by.
Bang!!
‘Oy, Mommy!’
The buddies explained something about those claps and the carburetor, but such things always were above my head.

On one of the first days in the new place, I went to the wooden toilet on the edge of the grounds.
When urged to take a leak we loosened bowls at any near nook so I would go that far for that.
It’s only that because of the frost using of the sorteer at the Detachment had certain risks to it.
The whole floor there became one solid yellow skating rink, the boots slid on the smooth ice and slid apart when squatting over an ochco. 
While I emptied the intestines at that faraway toilet I became aware of some strange auditory sensations. 
I kind of heard… well, not quite voices… rather, echoes of voices. 
A distant, cohesive rumble of voices, without any distinguishable words, but some low even hum without splashes.

Then I took a letter from the inside pocket of my jacket.
I never re-read them but kept on me.
Without looking who the letter was from I used it like toilet paper. 
I stood up, buttoned my pants and suddenly saw the source of the rumble.
The plank walls and partitions of the toilet were thickly covered with inscriptions. 
Names, dates, settlement names were written and scratched with pencils and pens.
Some climbed on top of others, there was not enough spare space.
I realized that earlier it used to be the grounds of the Stavropol Collection and Distribution Point of Draftees who, already immersed into the two-year-long eternity, already swept by it, were leaving their own here,
‘Sakha, village...’
‘Athos, settlement...’
‘Drun, city...’
They were already there—were engulfed—because their voices were not make-out-able, just some wordless hum, but the hands were still finishing the parting marks. 
‘Andron...’

(...in the construction battalion, the universal urge to leave a meme of oneself does not disappear, but becomes anonymous.
You would not see there the classic ‘Vasya was here’, they used a mutual mark for everybody:
‘Orel, DMB-73’.
Read it as ‘Drafted from the Orel-City (or region) demobilized in 1973’.
With graphite, chalk, paint on walls, on pipes, on the tin. 
In every construction site or building erected by the Stavropol Construction Battalion about a year or two before 1973, there was such a mark. 
Then there came ‘Tula, DMB-74’.
The time would come for ‘Sumy, DMB-75', and ‘Dnepr, DMB-75' but it still was so far away…) 
