
The Orion took part in the city music contest.
We performed two numbers but was not awarded any place.
In general, the whole affair seemed started for the sake of a local singer.
A young guy could sing without a microphone filling the whole audience with his voice.
That’s some singer!
I never heard him later on TV or over the radio, they had no vacancies there; muslim magomaevs and iosif kobsons kept their jobs for decades. 

The second of our numbers was ‘The Indian’s Song’ from the repertoire of Tom Jones.
No one knew what about he sang in it, but in the Soviet adaptation the song bemoaned the bitter fate of American Redskins: 

‘From reservation, know it, brother,
There's one way to hell and no other...’

At that contest, the 'brass' group in our band already had two horn players. 
Ensign Jafar Jafarov had been transferred to our conbat from I can't say where for I didn’t care what.
He came to the Club and announced that he was playing a horn.
His eastern appearance gave a pleasant impression of softness. 
A rounded face with the soft swarthy skin, the soft glinting of his black olive-like eyes, his soft smile when uttering, ‘I swear to you by my Mom!' 
And he really played the horn which he was bringing with him and carrying away in its case.
Kolya Commissar started to blow his one much better with Jafar around. 

Gray, the tamer of Karlookha, became a frequent visitor to the Club too, not as a musician though just because of it was a secluded spot in the conbat life.

At work, he fucked it at the very beginning of his service and was just doing two-year-long time at the construction battalion. 
And what fucking difference from the penitentiary colony?
A bit softer conditions and spetzovka in khaki color.

Arriving in the morning on the site, we went to the city and returned only for the evening truck home.
At times he was locked up in the clink but even the Battalion Commander regardless of his chronic brain marasmus had realised the futility of that educational measures towards the fully-developed stiff-lipped jail-bird with the bald patch of a scar on his eyebrow in the sharp face of the head stuck forward on the drooping neck from his broad shoulders. 
Gray walked through life along the unpretentious well-defined path of a hereditary thief.
 
In the Club, he shared stories of his recent adventures in the city or roughed Commissar. 
That was not right because both Commissar and he were from the same draft but for Gray, the Zone Code overweighted that of the construction battalion. 
On the eve of becoming a ‘pheasant' Commissar made a gaudy tattoo on the entire rear of his right hand – a ridge of mountains and the sun peeping from behind them with sharp spikes of rays and the bold inscription underneath to support that fresh shining world: ‘The North Caucasus'. 
When on the stage, he took such a position that the tattoo would face the audience and, blowing his horn aloft, he squinted proudly at the sprawling masterpiece of an unknown author. 

Probably, it went against Gray's grains that Commissar was swaggering with more ostentatious tattoo than his spider-cross (a Zona sign for the initiated) hardly bigger than a ping-pong ball, and Gray picked at the cheerful horn blower. 

(...however, when I use the word ‘probably' you don't have to take all that follows for its face value because of there certainly might be other assumptions besides it. 
There can be a whole lot of variants and interpretations but that ‘probably' sweeps them all aside and leaves just one, maybe not the truest to life. 

Word requires cautious treatment. 
At times you blurt something out, like, say  ‘laboohs (aka musicians) – are one family! We support each other like a wall!’ and run into nagging qualms: oops! I did it again…
Because of that over-generalizing words are good for slogans only, like:
‘Workers of all the countries – unite!’
Or else:
‘Bipeds! Love each other!’

They work only until the common interests coincide with the interests of the given, individually taken mammal but whenever the interests diverge then at once – you to yourselves, and we will go our way…) 

Let’s take the same Yura Zameshkevich.
After locking up the stoke-house he came to the Club.
There he wouldn't anger the eyes of the Fathers Commanders and could strum a guitar, serenely drink a mug of chifir (a pack of tea for 250 ml of water and bring to boiling) taken from the Canteen kitchen, and he's – one of us. 
A person of a subtle soul constitution, an exquisite connoisseur of real music, a loyal friend, a reliable comrade, and brother – a labooh, in a word.

But then his wife arrived to visit him and waited at the check-point house while he raced around looking for a parade crap and a greatcoat to go with her to the city.
He shaved hastily and got the Leave Ticket at the Staff barracks and dropped in for some reason to the Club where I was sitting on a back row seat.
He briskly jumped in and out of the musicians' and leaving the Club grabbed my completely unaware dick and all in his bearish grip and raised me in the air for goodbye. 
Of course, I screamed!
Then the pain passed but there remained an inescapable bewilderment.
What for?

(...I haven't found the answer either in writings of the naive primitivist Freud and his brother-scholars, not in all the Upanishads and Bhagavatas, nor in the two of Covenants, nor in the Quran. 
Only in ‘The History of Russia from Ancient Times’ some passage mentioned the case of a False Dmitry hiding at the back of the palace where a Cossack found him and dragged to the raging mob by grabbing his ‘secret knot’.
But there might be traced some purpose for the deed in contrast to Yura's…
What was it to him?. 

Certain questions are beyond the power of human comprehension; we only can point at them for the edification of the inquisitive and spread our hands wide out – this is out of reach for the human mind.

They have even invented a special scientific term for such cases.
When, say, you are so cool that taking a leak you let out a squirt that easily bores through the three-meter-thick layer of ice but then you come across some crap that even you don’t fucking know what the fuck it can be at all.
And that means you've run into that scientific thing, named transcendentalism…)

So what else did we do in the Club in addition to solfeggio, rehearsals and wistful contemplating of transcendental questions from all their sides?
Fooling around with the casually flashed chifir?
Its bitterness was a rare delicacy.
And vodka hardly happened oftener...

We used a code-knock at the door of the musicians' to be let in. 
With the right knock, the door would open but if not then go where you had come from, or shout through the closed door what was your fucking message. 

One time after the right code and click of opening lock the doorway filled the figure of Zampolit with an ensign from the Fourth Company behind who had knocked the code, the fucking excursion guide. 
Our cook-vocalist Volodya Rassolov, aka Pickle, was fast and up to the situation: while the two officers gaped around what’s what he glibly slipped the bottle into a boot top in the pair of them standing by his side.
Of course, Zampolit still called us a gang of drunkards and parasites but there had been no direct evidence already...

Yet most of all we talked: who was what in the civilian life, what would he do after the demobilization and that Third Company went to kick the shit out of Separate Company but the black-ass fuckers fought the assault back with their belt plates and the pigsty soldier-oversee could really be fucking his swine harem...
The champion of talking was, surely, Karpesha.
In his quiet confidential tone of voice, he would for hours spin a yarn about his going on leave when he in ten days six times broke up and reconciled with a girl, his former classmate...

Got bored with listening to the same minutiae for the seventh time?
Go out into the empty cinema hall, get seated next to Robert in the last row of seats and he would tell you about Parisian life.
In Paris, everyone knows everything about everybody else. 
For example, that Jean Marais was a gay.
And that’s a pity, of course.
Although I did not like him starring in ‘Fantômas', but as D'Artagnan in ‘The Iron Mask', he was the masculinity itself. 
That’s what that fucking Paris was doing of men...

Gray would share how he used to rough those in love passing along his street.
Going out of the wicket he'd cock up the trigger of his dad's shotgun and ask: 
‘Well, well, having a walk, Romeo?’
Neglecting the possibility of a friendly conversation, the guy would sprint away, but in fucking zigzags, sort of, issuing instructive shrieks, on the run, over his shoulder:
‘Run! Sveta, run!’
Or how he battered his wife for the first time and the following morning she had Chink eyes...

And Jafarov, thoughtfully stroking the soft gleam of his horn, would narrate that still but a kid he, at a ‘trash doing' peeped through the key-hole to watch a whore at a blowjob for an officer and after that she returned to the hall and danced with someone else and suck kissed another officer of a higher rank than the previous one.
‘But such a beautiful woman! Upon my word of honor! Fuck it!’

And when he served in the orchestra, their leader walked around the city with a tube.
The biggest trumpet in brass bands.
Hunting for ‘trash’, yes.
He was walking and looking out where they carried funeral wreaths for him to follow.
‘Would you like a military band at the funeral?
Let’s talk terms.’
I swear to you, such a wheeler-dealer. 
But not with the whole of the orchestra, sure thing.
That kind of ‘trash’ is called ‘to play a sleeper’.
Yes.
One time, as usual, we went ‘to play a sleeper'. 
On the second floor, the door to the landing wide open, we came in.
In the first room, the relatives sat around, crying. 
Everything in a proper way.
Only that they’re somehow too much at crying.
And with zero of notice towards the musicians.
The leader came up to the one he had made the deal with,
‘What’s the fuss?’
‘Oh, we’re so distressed! It’s a disaster. We may have to cancel the funeral.’
And she showed us to the neighbor room.
That one also full of relatives a-crying, but even louder than in the first room. 

In the room center, there's a table with a coffin on it. 
Everything in a proper way.
And in the coffin, the dead man a-sitting. 
Well, upon my word, just sitting upright.
He, when alive, was a hunchback.
Such a big hump, they couldn't make him lie down.
As a result, our ‘playing the sleeper’ got fucked...

The leader came nearer and pressed at the sleeper’s forehead.
It went over its hump and lay down in a proper way. 
Only now the legs got sticking up in the air.
No way to shut the lid...
‘We've already tried that way!' said she who he had made the deal with and wailed loudest in the room. 
But the leader was a real smartie, yes!
‘Okay,’ said he. ‘I want all out of the room but the musicians.’

In general, we pulled the deceased out of the coffin, put down with its forehead to the floor, hoisted the coffin over it and – Bang!
Who would like to lose a ‘trash’?

‘It.. helped?’asked I through tears.
Something cracked, but—I swear!—it straightened out.
We put the coffin back on the table and shoved the sleeper in.
All in a proper way.
Only that... 
‘??' (I no longer had any strength for asking.) 
It grew ten centimeters taller and its feet stuck out from the too fucking short coffin…

In the tall story of the labooh about the hunchback, sleeper reality merged with fiction.
I was letting out my last breath sprawling in a plywood seat of the cinema hall, chocked with laughter.
And I had no idea that in Stavropol there was the Regional Committee of the CPSU with the Secretary of the Committee, certain Gorbachov, aka Hunchy, but among the local ‘workshoppers’ they handled him ‘the Envelope’.

(…‘workshoppers’ were the people who wanted to do business under the realities of developed socialism, which wish they had to pay for.
Gorbachov trained the Stavropol workshoppers to bring the payment to him exclusively in envelopes, as it was the practice in the whole civilized world…)

I don’t want you to get the impression that the construction battalion was a hopeless dreary hard labor and nothing else.
Sometimes there too came the spring and we switched to the summer dress uniform.
We handed our long-sleeved undershirts and pea jackets in, to the company master sergeant, because the winter outfit for some reason had become so too heavy. 
We changed warm gray hats of artificial fur for dandyish aft caps.
It’s so nice to stand in the light-dressed ranks at the Morning Dispensing under a fresh blue sky with thin cloud feathers; to ride in the open back of a truck into the city filled with the morning sun where so many colorful dresses and skirts were walking the sidewalks.

In spring the population of girls grew drastically and they began to spill over and out of the sidewalks...
In any case, at the end of the working day, two girls appeared even in the territory of the future Medical Center. 
I was nearing the place where the truck would pick us up and those two girls walked in the same direction some thirty meters ahead of me.
Probably, they were taking a shortcut somewhere and paced in no hurry, talking to each other.
Suddenly their conversation broke off.
Bypassing our truck arrival point they accelerated to quick strides and disappeared from view.
And at the spot was already sitting Sasha Khvorostyuk – the first to come.

He had got perched on a half-meter stump with his hands resting on the knees widely apart, like, in the KGC position—King of Gay Cocks—and, happy with himself, turned his beak from side to side.
From his unbuttoned fly, his cock was hanging languidly. 
That's why the girls trotted away and they would hardly shortcut here anymore. 
Because of that fucked in the head platypus!

And sometimes in the construction battalion, you suddenly submerged into another world – away from trenches, shovels, pallets, roughing… 

Everything went on as always, but on entering the city our truck took to an unfamiliar route.
Probably, our lance-corporal Alik knew where we were going, but his lexicon limitations did not allow him to talk of anything beyond the usual commands and responses so he kept silent and importantly puffed looks.

The truck stopped near the city circus building.
We jumped off after Alik and a man in the civilian explained what we had to do.

There was a change in the circus – one troupe was leaving and replaced with the touring circus of Lilliputians.

(..what is the role of the construction battalion in the interval between two circuses? 
Exactly!
To load one and unload the other…)

But still it was a holiday and we festively dragged large boxes into long trailer vans with canvas top and festively pulled the same boxes out of the same, but already other, long trailer vans.
And then we ate ice-cream, drank kvass from the wheeled barrel in the circus square, entered the building and got seated wherever one chose, on the velvet crimson seats in the empty amphitheater around the arena.

The artists from the newly arrived Lilliputians troupe walked admired circles around the shortest serviceman in our special mission docker group.
If he had grown two centimeters shorter they would not press him in the army, not even to a construction battalion, but now: taller than a meter and fifty-six?
Wow! A ready-made non-combatant!
One of the Lilliputians even spoke to him in an undertone; the soldier never confessed of what.
Most likely, it was an invitation to enter the number of power acrobats, when a whole pyramid of light-weight Lilliputians was built upon the propping shoulders of one strongman...

Some Lilliputian woman asked me for help.
We left the building through a side passage and she led me to a row of house trailers.

(...it’s somehow strange to follow a woman not taller than your waist, it feels like being an elephant in a small Indian village…)

She climbed onto the high porch, threw her arm up above her head and pulled the handle of the unyielding door.
Then in a thin voice, she asked me to open it. 
I lowered my hand on the handle which readily turned down and pulled the door.
‘Thank you!' said a voice of the highest pitched flute. 
‘You’re welcome.’
It’s so inconvenient to live in a world not made to fit you...

I returned to the circus where Alik Aliev was racing along the arena circling after a white pony who openly resented flirtations from any stray corporals in kirza boots.
The wind instruments hurriedly rehearsed bravura marches in their pit above the curtained arena entrance, with a light streak of impudent out-of-keyism usual at circus orchestras.

A group of Lilliputians gathered by the heavy folds of the arena entrance curtains following as one of them, the size of a kindergarten kid, was raising the hell of a scandal at her husband whom she caught in a trailer with another Lilliputian woman. 
When performed in a chicken squeaks, foul language loses its specific weightiness, but the intensity of the infuriated wife’s emotions was on a par with the deepest Shakespearean passions...

Olga arrived in the middle of the day.
We were brought to the midday meal and they told me:
‘Your wife waits at the check-point house.’
I raced there, then to the Staff barracks.
They gave me a Leave Ticket only until the morning.
The Battalion Commander was not there, said they, the Ticket would be prolonged next day after the Morning Dispensing, said they.
Then I barely found some parade crap, the master sergeant was not there together with the storeroom key. 
But if in a canvas outfit, the military patrols in the city would rake you in whether you had the Ticket or not.
So we got to the city only in the evening but she had already had a room in the hotel.

One-person room with a washbasin on the wall.
Then some red-haired guy knocked at the door.
Olga said, meet please, we arrived by the same train together. 
The fellow traveler invited us to his room where he had a meeting with friends.
We went there only Olga asked me to say that she was my sister – when on the train she jazzed him that she was visiting her brother.

(...well, okay, then…
Sarah and Abraham were also doing the same trick...)

He had a long table in his room all filled with wine bottles, sort of a hussar banquet.
Sometime earlier he had been a cadet at the Stavropol Military Aviation School but got expelled and now came there to see his friends.
And those were already third-year cadets...

I knew their Aviation School, out squad-team once was laying partitions in the basement of some building there.
When the bell sounded and the cadets rushed to the classes from the yard, we combed trash pits in the gazebos hunting cigarette butts...

Now they were sharing common memories to each other, toasting this and that.
We also drank.
Then I saw how that red-haired dropped his palm on Olga’s knee.
What to do? Smash a bottle on his head?
Not quite a right thing for a girl's brother to shoo off his prospective brother-in-law. 
Of course, she took his hand off and I, like, hadn't seen anything. 
We left.

She said and so what of it?
And indeed, in Konotop on the Peace Square when our whole passe sat on a bench by the fountain to have a smoke they also stroke her knees and she took their hand off that same way. 
Yet we hadn’t been married then...

In the morning when I ran to the UAZ taking ensigns to the detachment, Jafarov rocked with laughter in its open back.
‘You ran as if in a slow-motion film stretch. Clearly doing your best, but still no progress. I swear by Mommy.
Good luck there was no counter wind.’

I was given a Leave Ticket until the evening check.
Dirty fuckers.

When I returned Olga was still sleeping in her blouse inside out.
Then it was the time to check out, the room was given for one day.

I told her I should be at the Company for the evening check and she said her train was also in the evening.
We went to the cinema; some kind of a fairy tale about a Persian Hercules named Rostam. 
Then we were sitting on a bench at the bottom of Komsomol Gorka hill.
She said that she had to go to the train but no need to see her off.
She cried.

The passers-by giggled on the sly – a classic picture by Repin: the girl got pregnant but the soldier doesn't care a fuck. 

She left.
I sat on a little more and went home...

The next day in the Canteen I knocked toppled a bowl of soup from the table.
It spilled in my lap, scolding hot even through the canvas pants.
I could not get it how it had happened.
Everyone at the table looked up at me, strangely silent, and no one laughed.
Spilled the soup in the lap.
What sign could it be? 
The blouse inside out.
Why?.

(...certain thoughts are better to be left alone and not thought at all but if you have still happened to start, they're better to be dropped and not thought all the way down their consequential road to the very end...) 

Zampolit ordered Sasha Roodko to have a brass band for the Victory Day, on May 9, or he'd be kicked out to a construction site as a plasterer’s hand and his Company's master sergeant would rot him ‘on the floors’ till the demobilization.
We did not want to let down the leader of the Orion and – here you are!
In three weeks we threw together a brass band. 

Jafarov and Commissar, clear enough, two horn players, Pickle played the baritone, Zameshkevich blew the tuba.
It turned out in their schooldays they participated in a brass music courses.
Karpesha was the drummer, Roodko played the clarinet, the Club painter beat the big drum and mine was the main instrument in any brass band – two copper plates.
Bzdents!!

Sasha Lopatko began his service in the same squad-team with me but then his Dad came and held negotiations in the Staff barracks… 
His Dad was, by the way, a priest.
Probably, for that reason, Sasha got to the construction battalion. 
Not anyone, after all, could be trusted with handling military weapons.

We prepared two numbers: “On the Hills of Manchuria” and “Farewell of the Slav Woman” not because we were frightened by Zampolit’s threat but simply a labooh would do what he could for a labooh.
On May 9 we changed into parade craps and were taken by the UAZ van to different construction sites escorted by the ‘goat’-Willis with Zampolit.
Holidays were for idlers and the construction battalion warriors had always been on duty.

The squad-teams working at the sites were ordered to briefly leave their front of work and fall in in front of their constructions.
Zampolit pushed over a very short speech (the marasmatic Battalion Commander would start an oration for half an hour without knowing what he was about at all), we played ‘The Hills’ and ‘The Slav’ and the sun playfully shined on the copper and brass.
To have a holiday you need a brass band...

The following step in the Orion’s career was the invitation to play dances in the club of the village of Demino located six kilometers further from our detachment along the same asphalt road.
The musicians not only played but, replacing each other at the instruments, climbed, in turn,  down from the small stage to the small hall to dance amidst the local youth. 
Of all the Orions the pleasure was withheld for the irreplaceable bass guitarist, Sasha Roodko.

Under the long song sung by Robert Zakarian, I was embracing the ample-bodied villager Irina. 
Life was smiling at me...
