
Before his demobilization Yura Zameshkevich informed Major Avetician, the Battalion Supply and Maintenance Commander, that no one but I was able to replace him at the position of the Battalion Stoker.
Zameshkevich's statement was actively backed by the Battalion Cook Vladimir Rassolov, aka Pickle, who had still to serve for another half a year. 
In course of the petition, the chef congratulated the Supply and Maintenance Commander on obtaining the long-awaited-for rank of Major.
As a result, Major Avetisian agreed to enroll me in the glorious ranks of the ‘chmo’.

The collective name of ‘chmo’ embraced all the servicemen engaged in the internal battalion services:
the pigman, dishwashers, stokers, cooks, the locksmith, the tailor, the shoemaker, the projectionist, drivers of the vehicles for the commanding officers, and even the assistant paramedic at the first aid unit – everybody who was not fortunate enough to work at construction sites was a part of ‘chmo' reporting to Major Avetisian. 

(...CHMO, in fact, was the acronym of ‘man messing around with the society' but it sounded so impressive that forced to forget the original meaning and nowadays everyone thinks that ‘chmo' is akin to ‘sucker' only more degrading…) 

Before his return to the civilian life, Yura Zameshkevich showed me the location of the water well with the water supply valves filling the water tank above the stoker-house.
He taught me to light the nozzle in the steam boiler furnace with a torch, to read the water measuring tube and the pressure gauge.
I was transferred to the Fourth Company where all the ‘chmo’ was listed and Yura got demobilized.

The ‘young' draft was from the Crimea and Major Avetisian chose me a partner from them – Vanya with a thin mustache and thick eyebrows. 
It's highly doubtful that Major Avetisian's choice of Vanya was prompted by the eyebrows thickness of the latter. 
Most likely, Vanya's father, who came to see his son on the third day of the service, found convincing arguments when negotiating with the Major. 
I shared Yura Zameshkevich’s lectures with Vanya and we began to work in two shifts.

The stoker-house of the Military Detachment 41769 consisted of two high halls in a brick one-story building. 
Each of the halls contained two massive boilers within their mutual brick lining and a stock of all kinds of pipes with valves and cocks – for hot water, for cold water, for steam, for fuel supply… 
In the concrete floor before each boiler was planted an air pump motor forcing the fuel to spray from the nozzle inside the respective furnace.
However, only one boiler was in permanent operation, the one in the further from the entrance hall, all the remaining were reserved or used for the heating in winter.

The stokers' task in summer was to provide steam for cooking boilers in the kitchen of the Canteen plus hot water for the Dishwashers'.   
And, once a month, we heated water for the bath of all the servicemen VSO-11 and Separate Company.
Anyway, each day you had to sit at a round table under the high window opposite the incessant howling of the air pump and the buzz of the nozzle flame in the boiler furnace for at least three or four hours until the on-duty cook knocked on the locked door of the stoker-house to say the havvage was ready. 
Then you could turn it off.
Silence is an invaluable grace.

To the right from the entrance door, there was a narrow room of the pumping section – to drive hot water through the heating system in winter. 
But going straight ahead, in the corner behind the twinned boilers of the first hall you’d find the door to a small workshop.
There was a window, a wooden workbench without a vice under the end wall across the room, an iron box in the corner between the door and the window containing a hammer and a blunt chisel, and a narrow piece of a mirror embedded in the plaster next to the switch of the electric bulb in the ceiling.

The arrival of the summer was marked by the chmo of the VSO-11 with a collective booze.
The battalion's truck delivering havvage to the watchmen at the construction sites and those kept there even at night by urgent works came back with a box of vodka smuggled into an emptied havvage thermos flask.
The on-duty officer at the check-point cast a fleeting glance into the back of the returning truck and it passed the gate.

The orgy started after the lights-out near the remote car-boxes.
I also was invited because a stoker is a handy accessory in the soldier life.

In the bright illumination from the full moon, some fifteen chmomen sat in a wide circle to the ground, like an aboriginal tribe of that field.
All were facing the center of the circle where the glass of vodka bottles and the sides of two pots with meat fried by cooks in large baking trays at the Canteen kitchen glistened in the moonlight. 
On the spread burlap of two empty sacks there piled several loaves of bread chopped in the Bread-Cutter’s.

Never before I had vodka drunk from the bottle neck.
The initial gulps were disgusting but the following kept pouring in smoothly.
The snack, regrettably, had got finished off all too soon.

I never finished the bottle in my hand.
Having risen on unsteady legs, with the best wishes to the honest company, I informed of immediate departure of me to the village of Demino.
‘All's nyshtyak, buddy-bros. What fucki' on-dut' what fucki' office..rr… It's me on-dut'… fuck!..' 

Nevertheless, not to run into, I crossed the perimeter fence near the pigsty, away from the barracks.
And I made for the round face of the full moon that shone from above distant Demino and was swaying back and forth like on a swing. 
I muttered reproaches to its treacherous inconstancy and to the field as well for arranging a sea-rolling in my way.
Then I fell down and tried to hoist me on my elbows but the earth gravity proved too powerful and the field was so irresistibly soft…

I woke up in the twilight of the dawn, only a hundred meters from the pigsty, dying from thirst, and went back to drink water from the tap in the stoker-house and to fall onto the workbench in the workshop room. 

I seemingly gave a too free rein to my wishful thinking when I imagined that until the end of my service I would live my life between the Club and the stoker-house. 
In the morning after one of the night shifts, Major Avetisian found me asleep in the workshop and ordered to go to the Company barrack.
And that at the time when many of the chmomen even skipped the evening check!
The soldier-clerk from the Stuff barracks slept at the Medical Unit as well as the paramedic assistant.
The Club painter Lopatko had a room of his own at the Club.
But a poor stoker, after a day of sitting in that howling hell of the stoker-house had to go for the evening check where to the calls for absent chmomen a voice from the ranks shouted ‘on duty!' and there were no questions at all... 

To somehow pass the time while they were cooking the havvage I took a book from the library in the Staff barracks with the assistance of the Staff clerk.
I chose it for its thickness so that it lasted longer.
‘The Idiot’ by Dostoevsky.
Wow! That’s the book!
A culmination upon culmination.
After his books prescribed by the school curriculum, I wouldn't have thought he had been writing so cool. 
And there wasn’t anything else to take from the Staff library with its just one shelf of books.
But reading the masterpieces of B. Polevoy and N. Ostrovsky after Dostoevsky’s book was not worth the while.

At the Club, Roodko passed me a booklet ‘The Beatles in America' about their tour there. 
Some of the ‘youngs’ brought it with him.
I undertook to translate it, the pictures in it were more than the text.
However, without a dictionary at hand, my school stock of vocabulary allowed to understand it only here and there.
I filled the gaps with my guesses but Roodko was happy all the same.

And so it went in a circle – the hiss of steam, the rumble of the air pump, the Club, the evening check and again to the Club.
And in the morning all over again.

Now Jafarov raced into the stoker-house.
Round eyes, pale face, white marks on the back of his khaki shirt, probably, rubbed against some whitewashed wall.
‘Hide me! The Chief of Staff is after me!' 
I looked out of the door and who was there but him – making for the stoker-house from the Canteen’s kitchen with his boxer’s swagger.
Jafarov barely had time to jump through the window in the workshop into the tall grass on the other side of the stoker-house.
‘No, Comrade Major, no one was coming here.’
But he’s got scent better than any dog and in a moment from around the corner:
‘Ensign Jafarov! To me!’
Fucking caput to you, ensign.
Why does the Chief of Staff chase Jafar as if with a dick in his ass-hole?
But then, who fucking cares…

And in the evening there’s another hunt in the field.
The swarthy cowboys from the Separate Company ran down a rat and drove it into a plugged pipe then splashed gasoline there and set fire to it.
The rat jumped out and galloped around the field like a ball of flames and they followed running – some cultural and sports event...

Then at my night shift I saw a brood of rats in the passage around the furnace with the twinned boilers and screamed at them and rushed to trample, but they fled.
Why (I wondered) that sudden rat hate cropped up in me? 
The instinct of self-preservation.
They wouldn’t forgive the people, including me too, the death of that rat martyr and I rushed at them to prevent their avenge.
Fucking moron...

Once I slept on the workbench and something sat on my chest.
Something dark like a clot of black fog, sort of, and it pressed strangling.
I wanted to brush it off but had no strength to stir or even to scream it away.
Some painful stickiness.
I hardly found the strength to wake up.
Later Vanya, putting on a look of an expert, began to assure me it was a bogey. 
They're really fucking stupid in the Crimea.
Bogeys live in houses.
The stoker-house is anything but a house.
Where could a bogey pop up by us from?

What I did not tell Vanya was that the creature sat right in that place on my chest that I had shaved with the razor-machine in front of the mirror piece embedded in the wall.
Well, to get a macho look, of course, because I had there no more hairs than Vanya on his upper lip.
But it fucking did not work and the chest remained as it had been before...

After an evening check I went to Demino and there I found the house of Irina whom I met when we played dances at their club. 
She also had an elder sister.
Irina went to the kitchen and her sister began a tete-a-tete with me to the tune that Irina was only nineteen years old and hadn't come across a low-grade buster in her life yet and would I mind her looking at my military ID by the way.
That way she hinted, sort of, that her sister was a virgin.
‘No worry, I’m not a buster.’

As for the military ID kept in my jacket inner pocket, then where could I get it from?
(You open it and on the right below:
“wife Olga Abramovna”)
I had no military ID, no, they only gave us it from the safe together with a Leave Ticket and locked it up back when we returned from the city.

Then there came the husband of the elder of the two sisters, named Senya.
At first, he, like, started to be jealous, sort of, but then all of us drank tea and I left.

A week later a soldier from the Separate Company ran into the stoker-house.
There’s a girl, said he, at the corner of the wall fence that asked for me.
I went there, it was Irina.

Demino folks sometimes went from Stavropol to their village along the asphalt road on foot in twos or threes, but she was alone.

Hello. Hey. Kisses.
We agreed that after the evening check I’d come to the village.
‘Will you walk with me a little?’
That meant along the whole wall past the Staff barracks, past the check-point.
‘No, I’ll wait for you near that corner.’

I walked along the paths inside the battalion, parallel to the asphalt road outside.
And from that far off corner, I even walked with her a bit. 

(...now I am sorry for missing that opportunity.
After all how beautifully we could pass together along the whole construction battalion.
Leisurely.
Absorbed in each other, without any world around.
And if the on-duty ensign suddenly stopped us at the check-point I might tell him…

Although, who cares what exactly I might tell him if I missed it and cowardly walked inside like a worthless boob...)


At night she undressed up to her panties, but no further.
The panties were large and stretching readily.
Probably, after all those who, like me, wanted but couldn’t manage to become the buster.
In the morning I left having obtained nothing not even tea this time.

Six kilometers along an asphalt road with the nature awakening around for a new day – it’s a rare treat.
The light was flowing higher and higher, but the sun hadn’t yet risen above the horizon.

I saw a horse on a roadside hillock among the greens of broad-leaved grass and without a moment’s hesitation turned towards him.
Pure idiocy.
I had never sat on a horse in my life, but suddenly I felt like it.
He started to leave, and I ran after him but did not catch up and only thoroughly soaked my canvas pants in the thick dew on the grass.

I returned to the road and walked on yelling all sorts of songs – nobody was near to hear my crap.

‘Sleep! The night of June is just six
hours loooooooooong!’

In a week I received her letter sent from Stavropol.
‘...the soul hurts – for whom? – for you!...’
Beautiful words, but I had already been hooked and trophied by the one that ‘...was immensely happy...’

(...I never answered the letter but I sincerely hope that Irina had eventually found a worthy buster and they started a happy and wealthy and blissful life since then…)

After serving for one year in the ranks of the armed forces of the USSR a serviceman was eligible for a 10-day furlough to visit his home – from where he was drafted. 
When I mentioned that to Major Avetisian he did not want even to listen.
How could Vanya withstand ten days alone?

Vanya said that yes, he was up to the task and Major Avetisian promised me the leave, so be it,  under the condition that I do a cosmetic renovation of the stoker-house. 
That is, I had to whitewash it from inside.
The locksmith, private Ter-Terian, showed me the place in the tall grass where the lime, not utilized at the previous renovations, was buried in the ground. 

I loaded it in portions in a bath basin with ears, added water, dragged it up onto the furnaces to reach the ceiling and with a broad brush – ...slip-slop… slop-slup… – whitewashed where I could reach.
Then I took a long iron ladder from the locksmith Ter-Terian and leaned it against the walls and at some places against the pipes run under the ceiling –  – ...slip-slop… slop-slup… – it’s just a circus and nothing else  – ...slip-slop… slop-slup… – Do boys whitewash a fence every day?

But no Tom Sawyer wouldn't stand a week of circus-like renovation – two spacey tall halls and huge furnaces in each with a pair of twinned boilers. 
Anticipation – that’s what helped me to hold out that week.
After all, Olga and I  – ...slip-slop…– so many things we hadn’t  tried yet  – ...slip-slip-slip-slop!.. – we’d do it that way and even so  – ...slop!. ...slop!....slop!. slop-slup!.. – ten nights that would shatter the world – ...slip-slip-slip-slop!. slop-slup!.

And now the renovation was over.
The concrete floor in both halls bore variously shaped white splotches even after I swept it.
The pipes under the ceiling got hastily wiped.

The whitewashing if not too uniform but then universal – without left-out spots.
Two huge halls and two gigantic furnaces.

‘Comrade Major, the renovation is done.’
‘And you call this a renovation?’
‘Comrade Major, you promised...’
“I hadn’t promise anything!’
So Major Avetisian had fucked Tom Sawyer.

SLIP-SLOP!!

At the end of the day, Gray came to the stoker-house. 
‘Got the fuck?’
‘Yea.’
In the construction battalion, everyone knew everything about everybody else. 
‘Fuck him. Now we’ll have a flight to Paris.’

From the inner pocket of his jacket, he took out a folded sheet of newspaper opened the place marked with a brownish thin plate, broke a pinch of it off and folded the newspaper as it was. 

Then he pressed and rolled a ‘Belomor-Canal’ cigarette until all the tobacco poured into his palm.
He sprinkled it with the crumbled pinch and mixed all up.
The tube of the emptied cigarette with tiny jerks consumed the mixture and got filled back.

Although I had never seen it done before, I still knew that he was stuffing a joint. 
‘Spark.' He brought up a burning match. ‘Keep the smoke in you.' 

We smoked the joint passing it to each other.
I diligently copied his way of inhaling and keeping the smoke in the lungs.
‘So what?’
‘What what?’
‘You ask? Wasn’t you fucking touched? Well, you’re some moose!’
‘I’m sorry.’
Disappointed, he left for the evening check...

A week later on my day shift a pair of soldiers of the Central Asian appearance modestly entered the stoker-house filled with the howling duet of the furnace and pump.
Maybe from the Separate Company, if not from the Crimean draft.
‘We a-need sieve it.’ one of them said timidly.
‘What?’
‘Da ganja. You knows yoursel.’
I did not really understand what all that was about yet it's inconvenient to look ignorant before the ‘young' ones. 
‘Okay.’

They came out and returned already four, carrying some burlap bags.
I took them to the workshop room and returned to watch the howlers.

A couple of times I checked into the workshop with the grass spread out on the workbench. 
They greeted me with mute grateful smiles and I went back – why to interfere with busy people knowing their job?

They left in two hours when it was already quiet in the stoker-house.
‘We there a-left.’ said the last in their file with a joyful smile.
In a shallow plywood box that had long been kicking around on the workbench, a handful of brownish sticky dust had been poured.
I put it into the iron box next to the never used hammer-with-chisel and forgot.

Of course, I remembered about that box when on the payday instead of the usual ‘Prima’ I bought ‘Belomor-Canal’.
Repeating the procedure demonstrated by Gray I stuffed a joint and sparked.

Vo-oh!
What the tha-at?
And I swam up to the mirror peeping from the wall and looked into to make sure there really was no one behind because there was a clear feeling that as if my head was like a balloon that was not filled too tight and you could jab it from opposite sides but not so much as to burst it just twist your fingers inside where they do not reach each other as I was now feeling jabbed through my temples and they twisted inside the brain convolutions but in the mirror there was only just me without anyone but then yes it was only very necessary to go and check the manometer glass or else we all will fly away and very high
 … you are the moose yourself, Gray...


(...so I became a ‘nashavan’, one of the enlightened initiates who get the drag from cannabis, aka marijuana, aka grass, aka anasha, aka…)

One of the first to know about my transition to a new quality was Guirok, a descendant of German colonists, the warrant officer from the Fourth Company.
He saw me engulfed in a stunned reading from the scraps of the last year's issue of the Red Star glued on a tin stand in the grass near the concrete edge of the drill ground. 
The sun was pouring its scorching heat on my aft cap.

So what? Like to political studies, like, I’m preparing…
Americans again defeated in Vietnam, our correspondent from Saigon…

He approached me on the right but seeing that the ‘Belomor-Canal' in my hands was smoked up to its paper mouthpiece and there was not even a ‘heel' left, he smiled a weak smile, licked his dry lips and melted away in the heat... 

The veil of misunderstanding got slipped off from my enlightened eyes and the revelation came that everyone in the Orion was on the drag and everyone in their own way.
Karpesha and Pickle in a businesslike manner.
Jafarov – softly.
Roodko was following the homeopathic system of small buoys at a certain interval of time. 
Robert – when they treated him, but not always.
It looked like I almost got late for a departing train.

But the coolest grass had Sasha Lopatko, the Club painter.
In his room, I was getting in the state of weightlessness as if in the orbital space station Salyut. 
Only not often because of his meanness.
Roodko also said that he had never seen such a terrible egoist in his life.
And strange it seemed indeed when having such a good father – a minister of the cult, who should have inoculated to his son the love towards your neighbor… 

(...when under the influence, the drag is of different kinds, say, you become so calm, you feel good, fluffy, and you want everyone to feel good and you don’t want to disturb anyone’s fluff.

 Or you suddenly notice some funny side in the surrounding reality and – you’re done, you just cannot stop, you’ll laugh until completely exhausted, then you’ll catch your breath and start again.
That drag is called ‘to catch the arrival’
This is the most dangerous drag if you are a TV announcer.

Still another time you can get concentrated on doing something and you do it, and do, and do – it had long already been not necessary but you still go on doing.
Like that team of zeks who felled a grove of oak trees with two jigsaws. 

Or, else, the ‘piggy’ drag; this is when you get started to eat something and suddenly such a gamma of taste sensation unfolds that you without noticing it can put away a whole pot of cold macaroni to the bottom.

And in general, you become clever, judicious; someone comes up to you ‘hello, how’s your nothing?’ and you already know beforehand at what minute he will beg for a joint.

Or just such thoughts come to you – fucking Isaac Newton! – but they do not linger, one thing or another distract you.
On the whole a play of shadows on the veil of swirling mist fog.

Music listening at high – that's the highest drag…) 

We had a record player on the bookshelf with an LP disk ‘Burn’ by the ‘Deep Purple’.
I sat on the floor next to a speaker with the cover in my hands and could consider it till one side played to the end – there were their busts, like, in bronze with a tongue of flame from each one's head, like a lighter, the dudes understood how to drag. 

The very bummer when anasha suddenly ran out, to whomever you rolled up – no one had.
That was called ‘empty suction’.
Everyone became evil as dogs because of the fucking khoomar that pressed, some dudes even went to pieces.
No kidding, they got breaking.
Some sore sight.
