
Once Gray heated me with pills that he brought from the city.
‘Would ye?’
‘What’s that?’
‘Nyshtyak’.
‘Okay’.
He was passing them, one by one, and I swallowed.
With the half of the pack over I said: 
‘And what’s the dose?’
‘All's nyshtyak.' 
So I consumed the whole pack. 

Then a roar flooded the ears, as from a waterfall and the night got dense and dark around.
Oh, the stoker-house. 
Vanya’s shift…
I entered.
He talked to me but I couldn’t get it at all.
Then I began to walk around the furnace, what for?
He told me later that at one point I stopped in the dark passage and stood there for half an hour as a monument.
In bronze.

And, most importantly, I was afraid of going to bed – what if somehow getting asleep I wouldn’t wake up?
But eventually, I came to myself. 
And Gray was just a bitchy scumbag not knowing the dose himself. 
Kinda experimenting on people whether I’d survive or not.
‘You’re some fucking moose!’

Vanya’s wife came on a visit from their Crimea village.
It seemed the conbat was just the club of married dolts.
Again I was pulling at the stoker-house one shift after another.

She left, Vanya changed from the parade crap into canvas outfit and came to the stoker-house as sad as the sadness itself.
It was dark outside the windows.
And then Roodko came.
He had a cold again and in the Medical Unit, they gave him some powder for doing inhalation. 
With a tin cup taken at dishwashers', he came to the stoker-house.
He poured the powder in the cup, added boiled water from the boiler tap and covered the cup with a piece of cardboard, like sort of a lid so that the mixture did not cool down right away.
So we sat with him at the round table talking our talks.
And, on the way, Roodko would move the cardboard, aka lid, sniff at the cup a time or two, cover it again and we would go on talking.

By that moment in his army service Vanya had already seen different sights in the stoker-house and now, from the dark next hall he followed all these manipulations and made his conclusions.
With decisive strides, he neared the round table and: 
‘Roodko! Gimme too!’
‘What to give?’
‘Well, this!’
And he pointed at the Roodko’s contraption.
Roodko was naive as any other intellectual, and he thought if he had a cold then others also could have it. 
‘Welcome.’

Vanya pulled the cardboard off, took a couple of deep sniffs, filling himself to the heels, and I saw how his eyes rolled under his forehead and even crosswise. 
And what? I’d believe it.
Self-hypnosis is a great power.
Faith moves the mountains.
Vanya believed that Roodko was consuming the fucking ‘blue fairy' by bucketfuls there and now he each moment could fall into hallucinatory strawberry fields. 
One had to save the buddy.

‘Vanya,' said I, ‘the other day in the Canteen I talked with a Tatar from your draft.' 
‘And what?’
‘Nothing special. I say, "friend, what’s your name?", and he answers "me Russian no understand". ‘Okay,’ says I, ‘it’s a clear matter, but how much do you have to serve yet?’ And here he at once clutches his head, ‘Vooy! Fucking too much!’ says he. So, Vanya, maybe it was a friend of yours?’
In short, I had pumped the partner back from hallucinations. 
That’s the law of military friendship – help your comrade out even by the cost of your own life...

In my opinion, the Orion provided its music services free of charge, that is for nothing. 
In any case, I do not remember any talks about any money for ‘doing trash’.
For us, the Orion members, just breaking beyond the limits of the Military Detachment 41769, playing dances for people dressed in civilian clothes was an invaluable payment itself.
So, if you like, we were paid with the minutes of freedom.
Time is money.

Was there some dough sticking to a palm at the commanding level?
I mean to Zampolit of our construction battalion. 
I have no idea, and I have no inclination to lie.

With the draft from Simferopol, one more musician, Yura Nikolaev, came and joined the Orion.
He knew his own worth.
His price-list he studied in his civilian life working in a restaurant on the rhythm guitar.
And he also sang (without particular voice range and without particular crap) within the framework of usual orders from restaurant revelers, heated by a couple decanters with vodka. 

‘Here’s water, cool, good water!
Water and vodka is a nice thing, gentlemen!' 

After the third decanter, it was time for hard rock: 

‘...by softly murmuring waters of the Nile, 
Free of care, of pains, of nasty neighbors,
There lived happy little green crocodile!..’

And when the client got fully ripe, the surrealistic splashes flew forth:

‘The firewood bloomed and horses were a-twitting,
A camel came from Africa on skates...’

So my presence in the Orion was justified by merely a couple of old numbers but the ensign appointed to supervise us at playing out of the battalion could not inform Zampolit that I was going with the ensemble for no good reasons.
And I was not alone in getting something for nothing – two or three chmomen usually went along with the fictitious position of the sound engineer. 

But playing dances was a seasonal affair.
The Orion played outside the VSO-11, mainly at the New Year parties.
Only once we were engaged in summer, or rather in the beginning of autumn. 
It was a party at the bakery plant. 
Whether it was the same one where we had been collecting alms from the production line conveyors I cannot know.
At the time of dances, I saw only the courtyard enclosed by the locked truck boxes and the three-story building of the Plant Management. 
The party buzzed on the second floor.

Of course, I danced a lot and one of my partners got so charmed that with no hesitation went out the hall at my suggestion.
We climbed the dark staircase to the third floor but there on the landing in front of the closed door to a corridor those chmo sound engineers were drinking wine. 

On the ground floor, the picture almost repeated itself only there it was her female co-employees smoking cigarettes. 
I led her to the exit and she obediently followed into the yard.
Aw, FUCK!!

The bare asphalt area was flooded with arc light.
Not a single shadow.
The only shaded place was the anthracite black strip of shadow from the pillar that held the dazzling arc lamp in the middle of the yard.
I was like that puppy Tuzik who snitched off a rubber hot water bottle but couldn't find a place to tear it up.
And I led her back.

Probably, she was disappointed with my lack of determination and surrender before the unpretentious minimalism of the situation.
She did not appear to the date appointed in the park the next evening.

I circled the dark alleys, stood for a while by the brightly lit Dance-Floor inside whose coral the youth of Stavropol were enjoying their rest, although it was dangerous – a military patrol could see from afar a soldier in a casual wear outfit.
She was nowhere and no the chances were against her popping up.
It’s time to sound the retreat.

‘Have you got matches, soldier?’
A long-haired guy with a shoulder bag on a wide strap addressed me. 
I took the matches from my pants pocket and handed out.
He took the matchbox and unzipped his bag.
On the top, apart from a cigarette pack lay a box of matches.
‘Oh! I’m so forgetful. Will you?’
He stretched out the pack opening the lid on the filters.
I pulled one out.
‘Ah, it’s so noisy here, giving me a headache. Will we walk a little?’
With his right hand, he shook up the wide curls of his dark bob cut hair. 

...hell, I don't understand… is he seducing me?. 
A short neat guy, long hair, a bag under his elbow.
‘Why not?’

We retreated together followed by glances of folks standing outside the fence of the Dance-Floor, that part of the public that never enters inside. 
Slowly strolling we went nowhere in particular.
He kept talking and talking. 
Such feminine intonations.
He told me a joke from the life of gays. 
In Moscow, one of them was caught and beaten up at a militia station and he yelled at the execution: 
‘Oh, Captain, I only wanted in my mouth, not in the teeth!' 
A play on words, but not funny, though clear enough.
And with him everything was clear.
I just wondered what’s next.

‘Would you like some wine?
‘Why not?’
We went to a nearby deli.
There was almost no line there.
He joyfully consulted with me if that wine over the counter was good.
That was the first time I'd ever seen such a thing – ‘Mountain Flower'. 
The shop was flooded with light and silent stares from the other customers.
He happily punched a check at the cashier and but the bottle into his dangling bag.

We returned to the park, to its upper part, where there were no benches and no lights from the street.
Standing in the darkness by the line of trimmed bushes, we drank wine, not all of it.
He dropped right in front of me on his knees and unbuttoned the fly in my pants.

In general, at first, it exited.
Then it became warm and wet.
His head, barely visible in the dark, pumped back-and-forth.
I moved the plate of my loosened belt behind, on my back, so that he did not hit his forehead against it. 

He changed the rhythm, changed the tempo.
He took a rest then started again. 
...somehow it's … monotonous... 
...for how long should I stand like this?. 

Chmo-ook.

..what?.. a time-out again?. 

‘You scoundrel! You’ve been with a slut! So you cannot come! A nasty scoundrel!
‘No, I haven’t.’
I buttoned up under his plaintive complains that I had such a suitable dick—exactly thirteen!—but nothing happened.
The discrepancy between his expert estimation and the measurements, once taken at a midday break at the KaPeVeRrZe Plant, did not hurt me taking into account his disappointment – so many efforts in vain.
Besides, he paid for the wine.
‘There still remains some – will you?' 
‘Ah, no.’

I finished the dolorous mountain flower under his story that he was passing from Nalchik, where some very important director of a very important enterprise made him such when he was still a boy. 
Then he embraced me for goodbye, but did not kiss—I had been with a slut, a nasty scoundrel, and had to face the music for that—and he left with a sentimentally luring gait towards the street lamps behind the park trees.

A boy from the city of Nalchik.
From his sad joke, it's easy to guess that gay life was not a bed of roses – keep low and hide until they would catch you. 
So what? Time to make for home, ain’t it?..

A letter came from Olga that she got a letter from my fellow serviceman.
He anonymously informed her of my amorous unauthorized marches in different directions from the location of the Military Detachment 41769, aka VSO-11.

I was indignant at the insolence of filthy insinuations.
After all neither in Demino nor at the bakery plant nothing happened! 
And the gay was not to be counted at all – I didn't even cum. 

Therefore in the letter of reply, I openly and honestly stated that there had been nothing of the kind and she should send that anonymous letter for carrying out a graphological examination and taking appropriate measures against that dirty bitch of my fellow serviceman. 

In her respective reply, she reported that the letter with fictions about my allegedly unstable behavior plunged her into a state of affectation at which point she tore the letter into tiny shreds. 

(...and here I again stumble on transcendence.
What for?
What’s the use of it for the anonymous serviceman?
And if Olga just tried to check me, then all the same – why?
A clear proof that possibilities of a human mind are limited.
In any case, those of mine…)

Vanya left for the evening check, it was my shift.
Gray came and brought with him a ‘young’ driver from the Simferopol draft.
Both were tight; the ‘young’ obviously had money that’s why Gray palled up with him.

And then Gray started up some strange crap, like, the guys had a gripe about me.
I couldn’t understand. What guys? What beefs?
Now you'd see, said he, and latched the front door. 

The three of us went on to the workshop room and Gray at once sneaked out.
I did not understand.
The ‘young’ looking aside asked:
‘Why d’you fink on guys?’
And he shot a fist into my face.
I shielded with my shoulder and jumped past him out of the door, the guy followed.
Behind the furnace, there was a breaker. 
I grabbed it and shouted,
‘Gray! Who the fuck did I fink on?’

Gray stood in the dark passage nearby.
Seeing me with a breaker he pelted body blows and I dropped the breaker.
After all, I had grabbed it instinctively, just for a warning. 
At that moment the iron shutter under the window moved and Sasha Khvorostyuk from our draft crawled in on his four, in boots and underpants and with a towel hanging from his neck.
He clearly was going to take a shower in the pump station room but the entrance was latched from inside.
Gray yelled at him,
‘Get the fuck out of here!’

Sasha crawled backward away and Gray turned to me again.
And my chest was bleeding – the jacket on me was unbuttoned and one of his blows had torn off the birthmark. 
Gray saw there was fucking lots of blood and he didn’t know what was in the room between me and the ‘young’ and he hadn’t gone too blind not to see the chance to get fucked up into the penal battalion.
So he just croaked a couple of times, ‘Look out!. The guys!..’
And they left.

So I didn’t understand what the fuck that all was about.
Later I saw him and asked.
He did not say anything clear, again ‘Look out! If there something..’
In short, he started selling himself for a zone master-thief.

Since then I had something to busy myself with at my shifts.
The pump engine was howling the boiler hissing and I, with my elbows planted into the round table and my head leaned against my raised hands, was thinking about one and the same thing.
Thinking for hours.
How do I bump Gray off? 

Bumping off, of course, was not a problem, with that same breaker but what then?
It was necessary to whack him and cop out – and how?
There was not anything even to dig a hole in the field, just a hammer-and-chisel in the workshop.
Ask someone for a shovel?
Bullshit.
Or, say in the pump station room, in that pit always filled with water.
It’s deep enough, to hitch a load and drop there.
But what if the water starts to stench with the corpse decomposing?

The rightest way was to shove it in the furnace of the boiler, the flame from the nozzle there shot out for at least two meters and would incinerate it without a trace.
That’s only Vanya would come for his shift and the stoker-house full of fried meat smell – how to explain?

The problem clearly had no solution and I, week after week, moved in a vicious circle until the on-duty cook would come and say it was time to turn off the boiler. 

Who knows, maybe I would have coped with that quadrangle of the circle but then the Tula draft was demobilized and they drove in new ‘youngs’ from Uzbekistan and Stavropol Region and Major Avetisian kicked me out of the stoker-house replacing with someone from Pyatigorsk city.

Fare thee well, Vanya!
And you, the round table, a confidant of silent fruitless meditations…

Yes, I became a ‘grandpa’ and I really felt it when I entered the sorteer and saw there Vasya from Buryn with whom we were slaving in the squad-team of Prostomolotov.
Vasya was squatting over an ochco holding an open newspaper before his nose.
That’s the fuck!
A picture by Repin – a squatter in the reading-room.
And he, so imposing, with the wide belt hung from around his neck, like a muffler, in a business-like manner was sort of checking the news of the day.
And then that cuntfucker finished me off completely.
He raised a little bit, benevolently nodded and said:
‘Good evening!’
I was fucking fucked to pieces.
That’s some Vasya!
Where did he fucking find such words?

My ‘grandpa’ period of service was passing pretty chaotically.
I no longer belonged to the gang of chmomen but the commanding officers were too lazy to transfer me from the Fourth Company somewhere else for only six months. 
So I had to work here and there.
Most of all at the MCU.

The MCU was no Missile Controlling Unit, but a mortar-concrete unit.
Although, a ‘grandpa’, of course, wouldn’t die of overwork.
I could shove the sand with a shovel and I could not shove the sand with the shovel, it depended.
The squad-team there was commanded by Misha Khmelnitsky from our draft.
He had become so solid, with a sergeant strips across his shoulders.
And he roughed the ‘youngs’ as we had been roughed so long before...


And I was also being sent to a brick factory where there were no squad-teams or ‘youngs’.
My job was stacking clamp, raw bricks,  in the ring kiln for burning.
The ring kiln from inside is a low arched tunnel and it works continuously.
At one spot a conveyor brings raw bricks through the opening in the wall—be quick to stack them in rows up to the ceiling!—and on the other side of the ring kiln diameter, the fire rages from the nozzles in the arched walls to bake bricks. 
The heat, of course, is felt even here and you have to work in an undershirt.
A much hotter job is loading of freshly baked bricks on that same conveyor only moving already in the opposite direction.
The heat pierces the mittens on your hands and radiates from the walls around and you have to undress to boots and pants.
And the following shift would be stacking raw bricks here again and so without an end – the loop cycle of the ring kiln...

And I started to spend more time in the barracks.
In case of abnormal situations, the younger drafts approached me for advice. 
For example, a taxi pulled up outside the wall-fence bringing a sergeant from our Company – blind, deaf and dead.
They called me, I checked – right, it's ours, stretched over the back seat, naked to the waist. 
The taxi driver said no fee, thank you, just take the crap away.
And the sergeant a real boar, it took three ‘youngs' to plop him over the wall into a snowdrift. 
Then into the dryer room next to the on-duty's cabinet-box, where the jackets were dried after the working day, he dried there too till the morning. 

The Uzbeks once treated me from a parcel received from their home. 
Dried melon plated in a braid. Sweet.
I remembered the parcel from my parents  – four cans of condensed milk taken to the Club.
And the Uzbeks had come up and treated on their own accord I would never know they had a parcel.
Probably, because of even being a ‘grandpa’ I never hewed from their rations of butter and sugar in the Canteen.
