
The Commander of the Fourth Company, Captain Chernykh, was transferred somewhere from the construction battalion or maybe his penalty stretch was over. 
The lieutenant was appointed a temporary commander.
The guys started a grumble – the Separate or the Third Companies watch TV but our box was dead for the second year, weren’t we people too?
So the Battalion Commander organized an exemplary meeting of the company personnel in the Leninist room. 

He sat on the table, like, Prince Charming, the trousers jerked up to the knees to demonstrate gray fur above his shoes and socks.
And we all in front of him on stools brought from the barracks waiting to hear some sage advice.
The Spanish artist Goya drew a whole series of such pictures.

‘Are you fucking going on strike? Eh?
Stupid dicks! It’s not Italy for you here!
The motherfuckers have spaghetti there!
One macaroni is long, the other – short.
Because fucking broken in halves!’

And, on giving out this monologue, he sat on in his nest, contentedly turning his glasses from side to side.
The eagle-owl fur-legged, digesting what fucking folly he had threw up right now.
And we sat opposite staring at him as faithfully as we should. 

But behind the statutory look that the Commanders were supposed to have of me, I recalled the story of Pickle about the hermaphrodite Sofochka from the Orel draft. 

Her parents had to shell out for the medical commission to turn a blind eye to some unusual features in their child physiological structure because of they wanted to have a rest for at least two years. 
Sofochka was sent to the construction battalion in order to make a real man out of her...

Shortly before the Orel draft demobilization in the barracks of the Fourth Company, there developed an explosive love triangle around the pretty dembel. 
She was giving her favor to two of her fellow servicemen at once.
The buddies couldn’t find a peaceful solution to the question: on whose bunk bed should she come after the lights-out?

Then in the same Leninist room, a meeting was arranged as well. 
Pickle could be sitting on the same very stool that now was under me when the Battalion Commander put the question squarely: 
‘Sofa, fuck your mother, tell me – you got a dick or a cunt there, after all?’

The rank-and-file serviceman rose from his stool and, having approached the senior in rank, dealt a slap in the face:
‘The old goat!’
Proudly rolling her hips she returned to the stool with her back to the happy squeaks of a laughing owl.
Fathers-Commanders.
Some fucking army!. 

I hardly would believe in the possibility of drafting a hermaphrodite to the army but the details of Pickle's story too much fitted the surrounding reality.

I returned to the current meeting in time for the concluding address from the lieutenant-colonel from his nest.
‘You are given the highest matter, fuck!
The brain!
The gray, fucking, stuff!.’
Yeah, he seemed having been bored already into his next gyrus.
You're in the fucking army now. 
Aw, fuck!.

At the Morning Dispensing the Chief Of Staff announced that the day before he saw a soldier from our battalion floundering in an AWOL. 
He had even chased the fucker but couldn’t take over.
However, the just retribution could never be avoided. 
Now the Chief of Staff would pass along the ranks and find the defamatory stain on our battalion’s glorious name.
And he paced along scanning carefully the petrified faces of the First Company, the Second Company, the Third Company, the Fourth Company.
A fig for you, Major! Only the gate remained and the road outside it.
He slowly retraced along the ranks.

That’s dumb.
If you were chasing someone yesterday, there's no chance he would come to the Morning Dispensing.
Go and wipe up your drivel.
Now he’s kicking back around in a drier room.
Or substituting the on-duty serviceman. 
Or it even could be one of those workers who did not come for months from the city.
The Major started his third attempt, fucking optimist.
The first Company the Second Company, the Third Company, and the Fourth Company.
Now happy?
A stupid head gives no rest to legs.
That’s some fucking arm…

‘Here he is!’
The Major’s boxing finger pointed at me.
‘What?! If you’d chased me I’d be screwed before the Dispensing!’
‘To the clink!’
The on-duty officer and two ‘dippers’ with red armbands approached me demanding to hand in my belt and escort me to the check-point house.
On the move, I still continued to debate that he, the bitch, knew himself it was not me, but they locked me in the clink all the same.

About an hour later the on-duty officer unlocked the door and gave my belt back to me.
I was assigned to penalty work – sprinkling sand over ice covering the road to the city.
The truck with the sand was at the gate already.

Squinting my eyes in the whistling wind I honestly threw shovelfuls of sand over the iron back side of the moving truck.
When it entered the city and went for the next load of sand, our diverged at the nearest traffic lights.

Then I jackalled for a bottle or two and woke up already at twilight sitting on a bench at the bottom of the Komsomol Gorka hill.
It turned out that the blizzard had already subsided; big snowflakes slowly downed from the dark above and melted on my face and on my chest in the wide-open pea jacket.
The passers-by flow was adding – the end of working day for non-manual employees.
They hurried home, they had nothing to do with a lonely soldier resting peacefully on the bench.

‘Hey!’
Someone still shook my knee.
‘Fuck you fucking faker!’
‘How dare you? I’m a KGB worker!’
‘Fuck you together with your KGB!’
‘Wait! I’ll call a patrol!’

Then I boarded a bus filled to the utmost.
I was rocking from hypothermia and in the dense mass of passengers there suddenly opened a free tunnel straight to a vacant seat.
Yes, our people love and respect the defenders of the Homeland...

We played at the New Year party of the Culinary College.
More precisely, they played it and I was simply a  body inertially following the Orion. 

The autumn draft from Pyatigorsk brought to the conbat some Volodya, aka Long.
He was not only long but also skinny, with dark circles under his eyes as fit an intravenous drug user. 
But he played a solo guitar as the guitarist from ‘Led Zeppelin’ in the disk ‘Stairway to Heaven’.

Roodko worshipped him and I also admired his technique but he was a piece of crap as a person.
‘Why are you the way you are, Long?’
‘I always show all my shit so that all piss off and leave me alone.’
He had a pleasant laugh but laughed rarely.
All in all, he was just a kid, but a god on the guitar. 

Sure enough, the construction battalion ensemble did nor perform the numbers from ‘Stair in Heaven’ but Long inserted such breaks in the Orion repertoire that even Jimmy Page wouldn't be ashamed of.
His buddy from Pyatigorsk brought him his guitar from home and also became the Orion drummer for the New Year season.
He played in one group with Long before they drafted the guitarist.
After the New Year season, he took Long's guitar back to Pyatigorsk. 
You couldn’t keep such things at the Club...

Yura Nikolayev, the star of the Crimean taverns, and Sasha Roodko, a virtuoso from the Dnepropetrovsk Philharmonic, were the vocalists at the New Year parties. 
Each one in his inherent and unimitable style accompanied with the improvised breaks from Jimmy Page, or, for a change, Hendrix who was also Jimmy. 
But for a normal music lover from the hinterland, nourished on the classical examples of the Soviet variety pop, such variations sounded unacceptably cacophonic, since they were not Kobzon-like in any way. 

So one of the future cooks had a legitimate reason to approach Yura Nikolayev and ask:
‘Sogwe, can you play Gussian folk music?’
That’s how she screwed words up with her burr.

And Yura knew that Roodko fell under the influence of Long whose word became the last and decisive in what to play and how to do it.
Therefore he directed the girl straight to Long so that she wouldn't lose time in vain.

And Long at the moment was completely lost in the Dryland inside his mouth, sprawling on a chair with his legs far away and wide apart, with his parade-crap jacket hung on the back of the chair, but the khaki tie in its place, only thrown over Long's shoulder. 
And he fixedly stared at something among the distant sand dunes licking his scorched lips with raspy dry tongue. 
‘Sogwe, do you have Gussian songs in yougg gwepegtoigwe?’

With the superhuman effort, the warrior on the chair gathered all his will together, concentrated, 
focused his optic organs in the direction of the remote sounds and discerned that a girl was speaking to him.
‘Gussian?  Gwepegtoigwe? Go stgaight to Comgade Goodko!' and he pointed his index finger at Sasha Roodko who stood by the loudspeaker box twirling sadly the volume knob of his bass guitar amp.

The girl was baffled, sure thing, being ping-ponged so from one musician to another, but she obviously was a sturdy backcountry strain and went all the way to the Orion nominal leader. 

‘I am vegwe sogwe,’ replied Roodko, and looked with his intrinsic foggy blue gaze, ‘but we genegally don’t play Gussian songs.’
And he sorrowfully sniffed with his nose.
He would be happy to say it some other way but he couldn’t because of his own burr.
But she did not know about that!

Now, go and talk about congenial complexes but everything—EVERY THING!—is acquired with what we are having experienced... 

That evening I had a kissing session with Valya Papayani, a Stavropol Greek woman.
Nothing more than kisses.
She told she was a teacher at that Culinary College and she was twenty-seven years old. 

So the next morning the Battalion Commander announced at the Dispensing:
‘Yesturday, one of our fucking musicians spread out a sixty-seven-old slut at the bottom of a staircase!' 
That marasmus-driven fucker couldn't even see twenty-seven from sixty-seven! 
Of course, it was that piece of shit, the ensign-supervisor who finked on me...

Two days later there was another New Year party somewhere else, but I did not dance there at all.
Because of so superior grass quality.
That was the grass of all the grass.
We sparked on the stairs and then went into the hall. 
The guys took their instruments so tenderly and gently and started to play
And the music was quiet as if from over the distant horizon and—which was characteristic—volume down. 
You could put your head to the loudspeaker and see how it quaked with the sound, but all the same somehow muffled.

Then I went to wander around the hall.
And the people there were (each of them) as if sawed out from the plywood, that is two-dimensional all of them.
I wanted to see what was on the backside of their plywood, but it did not work out because someone next got drawn into the picture and it was a two-dimensional one too. 
And, from far away, such slow and low – music… 
 
Sometimes above all their heads, on a pair of stems there floated a pair of eyeballs—like periscopes—those pseudo sound engineers were roaming the space stoned to death.
So funny bastards!. 
And they laughed too.
Where did they get that grass? 

We were brought home by midnight. 
There was a creaking Arctic frost.
Under the light of the spiky stars in the sky, we dragged the equipment onto the scene of the empty cold cinema hall. 
No one spoke a word.
No strength.
No desire to.
Because of All was emptiness.
The emptiness of emptiness and nothing but emptiness... 

Ah, yes! 
With the same autumn draft they had also driven in guys from Moldova and Moscow, but few of them – about ten people.
Moldovans had quite funny last names – Rahroo, Shooshoo.
The first names were normal though.

Vasya Shooshoo received a postal notification about a parcel from home awaiting him at the city main post office. 
To receive it he took with him Lyolik from Moscow, Vitalik from Simferopol and me too.

We collected the parcel and went into some canteen in the city, on the second floor.
Vasya opened it and there was,

‘Wine of Moldavia, my boy,
Created to present us joy!.’

Vasya took some macaroni with something on top and we held the cups in our hands hidden under the table for Vasya to fill them from the bottles without superfluous discussions with the canteen personnel. 
That way we finished off I didn’t know how many liters.
Well, what now?
Saddle up!
We went down to the first floor and Lyolik pissed there into a trash urn, while Vitalik, like, fenced him off to observe decency in the eyes of the public.

That Lyolik was generally frostbitten.
I once went to the construction materials factory and there was such a long conveyor going high up under the roof to transport clay or something.
Lyolik’s job there was to go up and down along that conveyor with a breaker and prod what clay had got jammed on the conveyor.

I can’t remember exactly what I went there for, but when Lyolik saw me the breaker in his hands fluttered in eager agitation.
And it was in his eyes how really much he wanted to bump me off.
Not for anything personal, just so, because of I turned up there the moment he had the breaker in his hands.
Apparently, he also hadn’t the quadrangle of the circle solved yet.
Bashing brains in with a breaker’s not a problem, but what then with the body?
In short, he took himself in hand that time.

We left the canteen and strolled along, talking.
Bright sun, white snow, life’s beautiful.
Then Lyolik and Vasya started to sort it out whose homeland was better – Moscow or Moldova?
Thus, word by word, they went over to clutching each other pea jackets’ breasts.
But Vitalik—that’s a fine fellow!—why, says he, on the street? Let’s go in some yard.

We went into the yard of some two-story apartment building.
Vitalik started reading instructions to them, sort of, a referee from London. 
No fighting with the belt plates, no kicking of the felled.
They threw off their belts and hats, and jackets, and – off they started the fun of heroes.
Both were above a meter and eighty with the fists like sledgehammers.
From each scored hit the echo echoed around the yard.
Ahey! Let’s sprinkle the snow with the red!

Vasya broke Lyolik’s brow.
Lyolik, bleeding, fell on one knee.
Vasya moved back to the ropes with linen – the real heroes observe the rules.

At that moment some mujik in a sailor’s striped vest ran down the porch of the two-story apartment block.
Someone of his rats of neighbors, says he, had called to the militia.
In short, the match had to be postponed.
Lyolik washed his mug with the snow, the servicemen put their outfits on and left the stadium.

But the fighters’ agitation did not abate.
We had to split into pairs.
I led Lyolik ahead, convincing him that Moscow was the capital of our Homeland, the best city on the Earth.
About ten meters behind Vitalik and Vasya followed, discussing Făt-Frumos.
Thus, in peaceful conversations slowly strolled we on.

And suddenly on the right, a Volga braked and two militiamen in greatcoats jumped out of it on the sidewalk. 
Lyolik and I unfastened our belts and noosed them round the right wrists leaving some length with the plate on its end for self-defense. 
The militiaman on the left flicked up the gun. 
A ludicrously small black hole in the bright ring of reflected sunshine looked into my face.

And then the second pair of the interlocutors arrived at the epicenter of discontent. 
They had been so carried away by the conversation that had not been looking around.
And all of a sudden—ta-dah!—an abrupt change of the scenery: two soldiers armed with plates on their belts against two militiamen with a gun. 
From the overabundance of feelings and associations, Vitalik's legs bent limply and only at the last moment, he managed to lean his back against the fence... 

Glory, glory be sung to you, the blessed land of Moldovia!
You had conceived and brought forth Vasya Shooshoo,  the Valiant!
The true warrior, filled with the spirit of combat brotherhood, seized he with mighty embrace the nearest to him militiaman—the one without a gun it was—and cried:
‘Run!’
He did not need to repeat it for me twice.

Oh, Gods! How frightened was I! How I fled!
Around and below me some fences, trees, alleys, hills, gullies, ramparts, and mountain ridges flashed…

To myself, I came only in some shed with wide longitudinal gaps in its walls between the horizontally nailed boards where it took a considerable period of time to put my breath into a normal shape.

In the evening only Lyolik showed up in the barracks.
He needed to wash his jacket of the blood from the broken eyebrow.
I led him to the stoker-house.
There they also had their news.
The lining of one of the furnaces had cracked, most likely because of the overheating of the boiler.
 During the accident, the smoke was pouring out from multiple cracks, full of black soot, obviously, which settled on the walls and the ceiling in both halls of the stoker-house. 
My cosmetic renovation was evenly lost under greasy black.

(...did I gloat?
If I did, then not too much – by that time I didn’t care a fuck about anything…)

Bulk materials are transported in special railway cars without a roof and the floor in such cars is a series of iron hatches.
When unloading, you knock aside the hook-lock placed outside, the hatch-lid falls down and the material spills out.
I do not know for which organization those five cars came to the station of Stavropol, but I can vividly see how they flapped the hatches open and nothing came out, then they looked from below in those hatches and saw a fine-grained monolith. 
The sand had been sent wet or soaked with rains on the way from some warmer corner of our unembraceable Mother Homeland and the consequent frosts along the endless way turned it into five huge parallelepipeds of carload in the shape of the car insides. 

There was no time  to wait for the reverse transformation, if you did not return the car within three days after its arrival to the station, or to your organization, then it's classified as ‘rolling stock delay' for which there was stipulated a large fine which got larger with each further day of the delay. 

The addressee organization of the icicled sand lost their head – the problem seemed really unsolvable.
And who is to solve unsolvable problems?
True again! The construction battalion.
So they brought three trucks of us to the station.

And this time we were given smooth breakers.
To solve the problem through the opened hatches was impossible: strikes at the monolith from below sent the breakers back at you with the tantamount force.
Let's try to fuck it from the top and go down along the car sides with the shovels. 
By rumors, they were even going to bring perforators yet for now – to attack with what’s in hands!

I tried for a while and gave it up – over the years of my service I got too fed up with the fucking monotony of the process. 
However, idle kicking back around was too cold.

Misha Khmelnitsky gave me money to go after ‘warming stuff’.
He himself couldn't do it, he was a sergeant in charge of the Uzbeks. 

And where do them folks manage to get money from?
Nothing could be simpler.
MCU turned out mortar of different kinds in the quantities scribbled in the application orders brought by the truck drivers.
And if there was no signed order?
Then the driver gave another piece of paper.
To whom?
To the Commander of the squad-team working at the MCU...

I went to the city.
Unfamiliar with the area, I found the right store not at once.
There I  loaded the bottles under my pea jacket girded with the belt and became so stout.
Who had ever said they poorly fed the construction battalion?
I went back with my head kept down not from shame just because of the snow lashing my face.
‘Why don’t you salute? Haven’t you been taught?’
By the inner service statute, you must salute every senior in rank be it even just a lance corporal. 
But, in fact, I hadn't seen the one who stopped me and then if I threw my hand to my hat in salute the bottles under the pea jacket would play jingle bells. 

‘My fault, Comrade...’
I looked at his shoulder strap and could not make it out – no stripes, like in ensign's one, but the star much bigger and bigger even than in Major's, but than I saw leaves in his collar patches. 
‘...Comrade Major-General, I had got lost in thought.’
‘He lost in thought! Dismissed!’
And that was right – a general and a private in black shoulder straps had, practically, no common gossips. 
The only officer who addressed me with the plural ‘You’ in two years...
