
In place of a Siberian Captain Cherhykh, the Commander of the Fourth Company became another Captain transferred from the Mongolian steppes.
He was very amiable and had an exceptionally long nose touching his smiling upper lip. 

When on duty he did not sit in the Commander office but walked around the barracks boasting about the money certificates he had brought from Mongolia and starting small wrestling matches with soldiers. 
And after those matches, he became so happily agitated. 
His eyes began to shine, a red blush crept over his cheeks and his nose began touching his both lips. 

I couldn’t get it at once – something familiar flickered in his grimaces, intonations but what exactly I could not…
Got it!
The boy from Nalchik!
But then, well, that's an officer… 
And he had a wife…

In general, I dubbed him after the name of the Mongolian currency and the handle took root at once among the soldiers of the company.

So Tughrik, at an evening check, once again got into how rich he was with all those certificates and the following he would go with his wife to buy a new refrigerator and a new wristwatch as well because the wristwatch he had was just a shame and had to be thrown away regardless of their name: ‘Commander's'. 
I could not stand it any longer and said:
‘If you don’t want to throw it away then give it to some soldier.’
To which, he immediately called out: 
‘Who said that?! Two steps out of the ranks!’
I stepped out.
He approached me and in a demonstrative way unfastened the watch strap.
‘Here you are!’
I took it and put into my pocket, although he certainly awaited a different outcome.

But the next day I had the hell of trouble with that watch.
Half a day I walked the streets attempting to sell it and no one agreed to buy.
They thought if a watch was proposed by a conbatist then it should have been stolen or cut off from a cold body.
And a good watch it was, my father for such a one paid 25 rubles in Moscow and I priced it only 7.
For the first time, I was not jackalling and proposed a square deal. 
Commerce is a dead thing if there is no demand.

In the end, I took it to a watchmaker's shop, and the master there suggested three rubles and I agreed. 

I stepped out of the workshop with the honestly earned money just to be confronted by a drunk:
‘Hey, soldier! Buy a watch from me! I'll give it for just three rubles!' 

That’s a coincidence for you!
But those drunks got really brazen, ready to even mess around with conbatists...

A week later, Vanya told me that recently a 'young' cook was sleeping in the workshop of the stoker-house. 
Tughrik was the on-duty officer that day and stuck his long nose even to the stoker-house.
Seeing a 'young' spread on a mattress thrown over the workbench he clawed his dick: 
‘Gimme! Gimme it! ‘ 
And Vanya concluded that Tughrik was already sucking two ‘young' cooks with one of them fucking his wife... 

In the barracks he one time tried to run me over,
‘Seems like you think you are so great a ‘grandpa’, eh?’
I did not say anything.
Not a word.
I just protruded my lips to issued three tiny sounds:
‘Chmo-suck, chmo-suck, chmo-suck!' 
He mutely turned around and walked away with a rigid back.
Since then, he stopped to notice me.
I was such a rascal.
“A naasty raascal!”

A newcomer appeared in the company.
He was transferred from another construction battalion somewhere in Dagestan.
There he went AWOL and caught his wife at cheating him with another man.
He tried to raise a dust but got tied up and when in the clink, he promised so convincingly to bump off everyone involved as well as himself for a dessert that they transferred him to us – the remotest point in the Caucasus. 
And he was of Caucasian origin too.
I can’t be more exact, in Dagestan alone there are some 48 Caucasian nationalities.

He did not talk to anyone and no one talked to him. 
Because of fear maybe, like of a new beast in the familiar cage.

One evening he sat on a stool in the aisle of the company’s barracks with a newspaper in his hands.
I was passing by and some headline attracted my attention.
I mean this, all I wanted was just to have a look and give it back.
But he replied:
‘Fuck off!’
‘What?! Thief-swaggering, salaga?’
He jumped up to his feet.
And I never had a chance to reach him.
A whole pack flew in to kick up a blizzard.
He broke away and ran out of the barracks.
What’s characteristic – no ‘grandpa’ was in that pack, just only ‘dippers’.

Later I figured out that they were so pissed because of his making them fear him for several days. 
They were scared of his being not like them. 
No ethnic grounds though, just because of his family tragedy he harbored a danger of bumping you off and fuck the quadrangle of the circle.
Any pack is cemented by fear.

And he ran away as far as the Stuff barracks, he did not have the nerve to make for his native Dagestan. 
An on-duty officer came from there and led me to the clink.

In the clink, there already was a Dnepropetrovsk buddy kicking back around.
He had a really nice grass and we went on high.
Then we lay upon the plank decking with make-belief mattresses of some padded jackets and he started to flow on, to the tune that the whole of our great power had long been under the control of the secret network of a shadow organization with a branched structure of interaction and we all were moving towards one great goal, regardless of whether we realized that or not... 
In general, kinda profound briefing delivered by a Knight Templar from Dnepropetrovsk.
But if you were such a fucking Frank Mason would they rake you up to a construction battalion? 
But I did not interfere with his structural analysis because the grass was his.

Then the door opened shedding some light from the corridor and letting a Gingerbread Man of Tartar origin roll in. 
Wow! Who’s that so funny and round?
Alimosha! What’s brought you here, bro?

On the arrival of his truck to the gate, the on-duty officer suspected him of being in a state of intoxication. 
He even intended to search Alimosha for the purpose of detecting an attempt to smuggle alcohol.
Then Alimosha started to knock himself on the chest, he unbuttoned his pea jacket and flung it open to demonstrate what an honest serviceman he was and the smell on his breath resulted from Zhiguli beer which he had accidentally drunk thinking it was lemonade in the bottle because of it was dark there! 
In that unbuttoned state, he was brought to join our clink conference. 

About five minutes later Alimosha knocked on the door and asked an on-duty ‘dipper' if the stars was still around. 
Gone to the Stuff barracks.
Then Alimosha took a bottle of wine from the sleeve of his pea jacket and ordered to take it to Vitya Novikov in the First Company because the buddies there were already waiting for it.
The on-duty ‘dipper' locked us again to run the errand. 
Then Alimosha took the second bottle from the second sleeve and remained without firm biceps, and then, falling into the classic grove: 

‘The warriors remembered the days of their youth,
The battles they fought in by each other’s side...’

In the morning all three of us were, of course, released – somebody had to fulfill the current five-year plan drawn by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
And the Caucasian with his threats of killing himself after a spree of murders in his native Dagestan was transferred to the Separate Company...

I had already seen that Uzbek in the Canteen and remembered as it was because of him I stumbled across the idea that one can get stoned even without grass altogether just by hitching his wagon to the wake of other guys’ drag.
That time we went to the Canteen after the lights out.
The ’youngs’ with a fatigue ‘on the floors’ had already started cleaning the hall.
We chose the table in the corner and sat down without bothering anyone – they still had wide swaths to wash before reaching the corner.
The joint circumnavigated in a good-mannered style and the drag took a laughing turn – we looked at each other's mugs and were wetting our pants with laughter. 

That Uzbek was dragging his soaked rag to-and-fro in some five-seven meters off us and suddenly joined the company with his snicker.
In short, watching our mirth he got recharged and dragged the same way – in our wake, without grass. 
We called him to the table and offered the heel, but he refused.
Well, it’s clear too,  the roughed ‘young’ feared that the on-duty piece of shit from his company could drop in to see what’s how around there.

And then I saw the same Uzbek again, he was going with the MCU squad-team in one truck-back with me. 
And at times, when on the road, he sang songs in their own language and following their Central Asian modal-tonal harmony. 
Not something you’re accustomed to but listenable on the whole.
Like Jimmy Hendrix without a guitar.
The other Uzbeks got perked up and the road ended more quickly.
Good fellow ‘akyn’, or maybe ‘ashugh’?
Well, in short – labooh.

Sergeant Misha Khmelnitsky couldn't pronounce his name in any way and in the end, said: 
‘Okay! You will be Vasya!’

One time we were riding home and Khmel said:
‘Vasya! Sing up!’
I saw that the Uzbek was in no mood, reluctant, but Khmel did not shut up:
‘What? Can’t get it, salabon? Ordered – sing!’

Well, the labooh started a song.
The rest of the Uzbeks looked at him like angry dogs and scolded in their language, like, you bitch, are you a canary for this motherfucker?
I did not know the language but it was easy to guess.

The labooh after one verse made the coda.
But Khmel clung again:
‘Sing more, Vasya!’
And the soldier started again on high notes.
I saw the Uzbeks faces blossomed up in one place they even laughed.
Well, the singer clearly adopted his song to the situation:

‘Vai, sergeant, vai, I have fucked your Mom!.' 

But Khmel didn’t get it at all:

‘That’s it! Well done! More!’

And he got what he was asking for: 

‘Vai, sergeant, vai, I have fucked your fucking mouth!.’
 
The Uzbeks were rocking with laughter and the sergeant liked it too: 
‘Very well, Vasya!’

At that moment the truck pulled up at the traffic lights and I, without a superfluous goodbye to the nice company of music lovers, slipped over the back side and down the short ladder. 

And I slipped away to the quiet mouse.
Actually, her name was Tanya, but to myself, I called her ‘Quiet Mouse'. 
A blonde.
When I first approached her in a trolleybus she was answering so quietly. 

And could I not approach?
For several times she was going in the same trolley on which I went from the Ring Road to the MCU.
She told me later,
‘I noticed you still in February. At the very frosts, your pea jacket collar was wide open with the whole your neck sticking out.' 

‘… we always choose those very women, 
who have already chosen us ...’

That morning, when she agreed to date the same day evening by the Ring Road I was not alone going to the MCU by a trolley.
From our stop, we had still to stomp on along a lane and I said to that Moldovan: 
‘Rahroo! Would you bet I undress now?’
In general, there was snow all around, although it was March already, and I stripped to the waist strolling along in just boots and the canvas pants with Rahroo carrying my pea jacket with hat, and jacket and shirt behind.
Because of I had got such a fit of delight.
But that was before her telling me about my stuck out neck.

Most likely, my topless walk resulted from the meeting a god’s fool.
Back in February, I was hanging out for a week at the 50-apartment block of flats – that same that we had started with rebar breakers, it was already moving towards the delivery. 
And buddies from a squad-team there told me about some old man walking barefoot in one nearby street.

I had gone there twice on purpose before I met him.
It was an old bearded man.
The beard was white and slightly yellowish and the man had also a hat and an overcoat on.
His pants were rolled up leaving his legs bare from knees to feet.
He swept a path in the snow drifts with a besom.
Skinny and long, but hardly a drug addict because he had a drag of his own.
The snow was falling in big rare flakes and he walked barefoot and swept an empty path in the empty street.
I stood by for a while looking at him and he gave me a sidelong glance busy with his business. 
We both kept silent.
And then I left.

(...everyone believes that they are right and that their way of believing is the rightest one.

In Stavropol mujiks, the faith, for some reason, is firmly connected with their feet. 
Already in the third millennium, they showed a man on TV who had crawled on his knees from Stavropol to Moscow. 
To withstand the trying deed, he fixed pieces of automobile tires on his knees and crawled on replacing the tires as needed. 

For the revival of faith in the Christ-loving people of Russia and to bring God’s blessing to them.

Well, I, personally, don’t mind.
My present confession is that of tolerant unbelieving.
I entertain a strong belief that true tolerance happens exclusively among unbelievers.
All the rest are only pretending it but in fact, they want to convert everyone else into a follower of their faith. 
Even the atheists are a confession like others all too happy to convert you and enlarge their congregation of believers in absence of god.

An unbeliever is the one who has nothing to believe with, because of absence a corresponding organ with believing functions.

‘… the doctor said, ‘we’ll just remove the odd appendix...’

but being over-blind he chopped off what you needed for believing… 

So crawl as far as you please, sit in the lotus until you bloom, knead the floor with your forehead—whatever!—if not in my kitchen garden, of course. 
Don’t disturb my tolerance, please…)

But at the construction battalion that spring I did not care a damn about any theology when awaiting for the trolleybus number five by the Ring Road.
Several of them passed by until Tanya arrived.
We quietly walked along the sidewalk by the host of five-story blocks laid of white silicate brick in the Lipetsk masonry fashion.
Then we entered one of the staircase entrances in one of the five-story blocks.
We embraced warmly and quietly by the heating battery on the first floor at the bottom of the staircase. 
Still standing, we quietly coupled.
Then we went out again to the endless sidewalk and I escorted her to another entrance in another five-story block...

Then for a long time, it was not possible to repeat the warmly quiet pleasure. 
The staircase entrances for some reason became too crowded. 
A couple of times we went to the movies for daytime shows but there were too many kids around.
One time Captain Pissak spotted me leaving a cinema with her.
He called me aside and called for an immediate end to all sorts of relations with her, although he could not present any sound foundations for such a demand.
And that was annoying – Okay, suppose, you’re Pissak, then go and command in your First Company and I had Tughrik to report to.

But then I finally visit her at home.
It turned out, she lived in a different entrance from that where I escorted her that first time, and the building was half a block further on the sidewalk. 
When I took my boots off in the hallway and stuck the footcloths in them as deep as I could so that they wouldn't propagate their smell too freely, it turned out that I was barefoot and even slippers did not hide that fact – like a god's fool only without a besom. 

At home, she had a mother and a daughter of three years old. 
Then her mother took her daughter for a walk to a store and we sat on the carpet and she opened her album with photos.
Both in the album photos and on the carpet she was very cute that quiet mouse blonde Tanya. 
I had only to reach out and put my hand on her shoulder inside her home gown to have it on the carpet next to the album, but I could not.
I did not know what exactly, but something stopped me from moving the most natural way. 

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my misfortunes or joys, ups, and downs, all my pleasures, and deprivations sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you  lying in a tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lap of the river named Varanda…) 

Then her mother returned from the store together with her daughter and a mesh-bag of bright oranges.

Our following meetings took place outside her apartment and she started to show interest in looking at my military ID.
The sham about my ID locked up in the Commanders safe did not work – she was two years older than me.

Then there cropped up some nagging predicaments and confusions in the peaceful flow of my service, I got in a scrape or two and we lost sight of each other.
Already before the demobilization I again went to her, but her mother said she was not home.
I waited for her at the entrance to the staircase. 
We went out to a wide night courtyard between the five-story buildings and she quietly succumbed in the natural way on the table in the playgrounds. 
However, I cum too soon, much faster than in that entrance.
I did not like that and I broke off relations with her, in conformance with the wish of Pissak, the Commander of First Company.
Because, as it's written in the statute of inner military service "an order of the commander is the law for a lower ranked serviceman"...

The closer the demobilization, the shorter is your sleep.
Where had you retired, the blissful times when I, as a salaga, fell asleep the moment my head touched the pillow? 
But now?
The evening check was over, the long aimless visit to the Club paid, again I plodded back to the barracks without any hope of going to sleep.

So we got together, the nighthawks of the same feather, we lay upon bunk beds in one or another koobrik, we gossiped of this, we gossiped of that, or just drove a fool. 

(… many years later I learned from Solzhenitsyn's ‘Archipelago' that it was an old customary pastime among zeks, inherited from the tsarist times when someone in the cell retold some novel by some Dickens with adaptations and retouch of the details to bring them closer to the contemporary everyday life. 
Only instead of ‘driving a fool’ zeks called it ‘stamping a novel’…)

When it was my turn I stamped a novel of revenge about two young lovers and a cruel baron from the nearby castle.
The vicious brute of a baron imprisoned the young man in the dark dungeon cell and was methodically using his beloved as a sex slave right in front of the poor guy.
A month later the prisoner broke the peg fixing his chain to the wall and paid the bills for lodging and warm hospitality.

(...the plot had nothing to do with Dickens though, when driving a fool I, with my closed eyes, saw the translucent blouse of Michelle Mercier from the first sequel of ‘Angelica’.
But here the question arises: if I farmed out my Michelle to the baron to use her (for a whole month!) along his senile fantasies in turn with his wolfhound and various objects of medieval utensils and implements, albeit jerking at the peg in attempts to pull it from the wall, but still collaborationistically keeping time with what was happening, then, may it be I’m a pervert?
Of course, the question would be risen not by the listeners but by myself and not then but much later, but still and yet…) 

During the disassembling of the baron conducted in the most savage manner, Khmel suddenly hollered:
‘Hey, on-duty!’
From the cabinet-box by the faraway entrance to the barracks, the on-duty came and Khmel told him: 
‘He had already fucked everybody with his snoring. Dome the fucker, let him RIP.’
‘Who?’
‘In the koobrik over two passages.’
The on-duty bent over the peace disturber and listened to the sleepy breathing: 
‘No, not this one.’
Lyolik joined in the conversation:
‘Who the fuck cares? Dome the fucker all the same.’

(...the depth of philosophical wisdom of the utterance still brings the tears of tender delight to my eyes. 

‘Who the fuck cares? Dome the fucker all the same.’

Here it is – the quintessence of statuary and other service relations, the pledge of combat well-trainedness, readiness, and capability of the army… 
I would like to say of ‘the Soviet army’, the one that’s gone into oblivion… 
But who nowadays believes in Father Christmas?..)

A dembel-soldier pines away under a constant tension.
A state of incomprehensible, groundless anxiety deprives him of sleep, appetite, the ability to assess his actions with requirements of elementary logic. 
Every morning the buddies from your draft are lined up in groups facing the ranks of the Morning Dispensing and, after a brief farewell from Zampolit, or Chief of Staff, they go to the gate by the checkpoint, go to the demobilization, go home.
And when’s my turn?!

After kicking around to three o’clock at the location of VSO-11, I sat in the cabin of UAZ truck used for bringing bread from Stavropol.
Under the canvas top of the truck back climbed Lyolik and some of his buddies also going AWOL.
We left through the gate and sped towards the city along the asphalt road wet after the recent thunderstorm. 

The asphalt along the road edges was all ruts and holes so the white car that jumped out of the turn was darting over the middle.
The UAZ driver dodged, leaping with the right wheels onto the muddy roadside.
The turn was rushing at him – he turned the rudder wheel to the left and hit the brakes.
The UAZ jumped back onto the road and skidded along in a free-style gliding. 
The driver by my side was frantically spinning the wheel in all directions.
The truck was speedily crabbing along changing the sides at his will, paying no attention to what the driver did to the wheel.
In the end, we were turned in the opposite direction and, after traveling backward for some time, the truck capsized. 
The embankment was not too high—about two meters—so we turned upside down no more than two times.
