~~~ My Universities: Part 1 ~~~

"And the drill ground will turn shiny
Will be polished with our boots
Will be milled to dust fine and tiny
By the brave marching recruits..."

(to the air of ‘Take the harness, guys, off your horses...’)

At the Draft Collection and Distribution Point in Sumy, I made the desperate last attempt to get exempted from army service.
At the medical check, I told the oculist that I could see just only two lines in his check table with my left eye though, in fact, I saw five. 
For all my pains, I was classified fit for non-combat service in the construction troops.
After two days of kicking around on bare-plunk decking at the Collection and Distribution Point and equally hard shelves in the railway cars for draftees, I stood on the platform of the Stavropol Railway Station in one shoe. 
Unlike the Perseus’ case, my right foot was not bare but within a cotton black sock.

And what else could I do?
Early in the morning when they commanded all to leave the car I frisked not only the section in which I slept in but the neighboring ones as well.
My right shoe was nowhere to be found.
I was starting to suspect that disappearance of my footwear item was accomplished with the vindictive hand of Valik Nazarenko from Krolevets.

Of all the guys in our car section only he had a thick pack of postcards and at each stop begged the passers-by on the station platform to drop a bunch of filled out postcards to a mailbox.
Who would deny a young boy carried away if not in a prison but still and yet locked railway car?
And when our train left the station, Valik would give his face a clever look and ask himself the same question:
‘Who else to write to?’
Just to answer to himself:
‘Ah! I know!’
And he began to fill another postcard or two that he was going to serve in the army and had already passed Rostov city. 
Then he read his production out loud for our car section.
They all were alike and inevitably ended with:
‘My best wishes, Valik’.
At some point, I suggested him to vary the word order—at least in some postcards, for a change—to make it:
‘My Valik wishes best'. 
All laughed, but he laughs best who laughs last, and I, standing on the platform in a sock, did not feel like laughing. 
My pun seemed to have kicked back and made my shoe missing at our arrival in the city of Stavropol. 
The redhead bastard paid with a practical joke for a whimsical play on words.
However, who’s not caught at action is not the joker.

We were told to get into the backs of waiting trucks that drove through an unfamiliar, not yet awaken city, then out of it, then took the left turn from the highway and after three more kilometers along an asphalt road reached a long low wall of white silicate bricks. 
The trucks turned into the gate of welded iron pipes by the checkpoint house with the red glass tablet announcing it was the Military-Construction Unit 11, Military Detachment 41769, but the road left behind the gate went on to the nearby horizon...

By the bathhouse, they asked us whether anyone was going to send his clothes back home. 
No one wished to.
Everyone had left for the service in their junk clothes which they dropped on the grass near the bathhouse porch.

Only in the canteen at the Rostov  Collection and Distribution Point, I saw a draftee in his suit and necktie. 
He also fell out of the picture with his age – about ten years older than the surrounding skinhead yobbos, however, younger than twenty-seven otherwise they wouldn’t draft him.
And his hair wasn’t cut.
He ate nothing, just sat without a motion looking in front of him. 
Or rather looking inward.

(...because it's from outside that we all look the same, but inside there lots upon lots to observe; the epics unfolding inside are far more cooler than the Illyad together with the Odysseus…) 

There he was sitting in a tie loosened on his thick neck, taking no notice of sympathetic looks, not knowing what was awaiting where they would take him...

In the Military-Construction Unit 11, aka VSO-11, there was a necessary minimum for keeping many people in one place.

Five long barracks paneled from inside with painted plywood sheets and encased from outside with white bricks laid in shiner position.
The barracks were connected with the common system of steam-heating pipes running in the air on tall iron props.
For the heat insulation, the pipes were wrapped in glass wool, fixed with white glass cloth and covered with the finishing layer of black roofing felt kept in place by twists of thin baling wire.

Three of the barracks were lined by the brick wall separating from the road outside, each of them surrounded by an internal asphalt path.
Behind the middle barrack, across the path, there stood a wider, but also one-story building comprising the Canteen with its kitchen, and the Club of the Detachment. 

In the third line, counting from the road, there was the bath, the stoke-house, the shoe-making and sewing shops all in one building as well.

The drill ground, covered with a rough layer of concrete, stretched from the gate and the Canteen. 
Opposite the Canteen, across the drill ground, there stood the last two barracks of all the five parallel to each other and the wall along the outside road.

At the far left corner of the drill ground, there was a brick toilet, aka sorteer, with ten holes, aka ochcos, along one wall and the cemented urinal runnel along the other. 

To the left of the sorteer, there was put a long tin trough of the washbasin raised by meter-tall rebar props above the ground.
The water pipe with a dozen taps ran along above the trough.

Further on behind the drill ground there stood three tall truck boxes under one roof and without the face wall and to the left from them – two rows of sturdy sheds serving ware and food warehouses.
Behind the warehouses, a bit on the outskirts of the Detachment rectangular grounds stood the squat structure of the pigsty. 

Ah, yes!
The last but not least – the narrow brick box of the military store by the gate, opposite the checkpoint house.

The narrow white wall of bricks bordered the grounds only along the asphalt road, and the rest of the perimeter was guarded by a fence of barbed wire, familiar from the very childhood. 

Behind the truck boxes and the barbed wire fence, a wide field rose hiding in the invisible hollow a deserted sand pit and the village of Tatarka which the soldiers of VSO-11 visited at their AWOLs, aka absences without leave. 

And the road by which we were brought to the Unit, having run another six kilometers, entered the village of Demino where the soldiers also went for AWOLs, as well as to the city of Stavropol, sure thing.

But all that I did not yet know leaving the bathhouse in the cotton khaki outfit and in kirza boots on top of badly wound footcloths – two strips of light coarse calico or flannel fabric, 30 by 60 centimeters, that are much more practical than common socks. 
In summer, baring your feet you'll notice the dirty stains left by the dust getting through the fabric of socks while the footcloths become dirty themselves and still keep the feet clean. 
But it is necessary to wind them properly around feet—tight, smooth and without wrinkles—otherwise, you'd rub your feet to bleeding. 
And in winter, footcloths without socks feel warmer that footcloths over socks, though both methods do not prevent toes getting frozen inside the boots...

Two soldiers from the previous drafts were sorting out the civilian clothes dropped on the grass in front of the bathhouse, checking whether there were any ‘citizen-ka’ clothes suitable for AWOLs.
We were brought to the Club of the Detachment with a stage without any curtains and rows of plywood seats filling all of the hall.
Our service started with dragging the audience seats out of the Club, washing the wide boards of its floor, bringing and installing iron two-tier beds for the Fourth Company to sleep on since we, the recruits, had to be kept in their barrack. 

At the entrance to the barrack, we were divided into three platoons under the command of a separate sergeant.
The sergeants compiled lists of their commandos checked them with the general list by the lieutenant and started training the newbies.
In all the three platoon were drilled the same commands.
‘Platoooon! Fall in!’
‘Platoooon! Fall out!’
‘Platoooon! Fall in!’
‘Platoooon! Fall out!’
‘Platoooon! Fall in!’
‘Platoooon! Fall out!’

We executed the commands keeping the hunger in check with the wishful thinking because a small group of recruits had been already sent to lay tables in the Canteen with the midday meal. 
And finally:
‘Fall in for the meal!' 
‘Slow.. march!’

In contrast to the Club where you had to step up three stairs of a porch before the door, in the Canteen, on entering the door, you went three steps down. 

In the spacious hall, there were two quads of tables separated by the central aisle. 
On both sides of each table there stood brown benches of solid planks letting for ten men to sit in a row.
Smoothly polished concrete floor filled the hall with an echoing hum like in the waiting rooms of passenger stations.
Along the whole left wall, two steps stretched under the three windows from the outside rooms.
Under all the three windows there ran one wide shelf-ledge covered with painted tin. 

The first and also the smallest of the windows was the seat of the Bread-Cutter already closed from within with its tin-covered shutter. 
The next one—wide and having no shutters—opened the view of the kitchen with the steam rising off the wide cylinders of nickel-plated boilers for cooking, and a pair of soldier-cooks, among them, in khaki trousers, slippers on bare feet and in white jackets bearing greasy stains.
One of the cooks had a white-cloth beret on his head.
The last, also long and open window connected to the Dishwashers' Room filled with steam and noise of hot water bursting from several taps at once in the long tin trough with heaps of used enamel cups and bowls, and aluminum spoons.
The far blind wall opposite the entrance separated the Canteen from the Club.
In the right wall high up above the floor, the row wooden frames kept panes of unhinged windows.

The white enamel bowls arranged in two long rows along the table marked the seating places on the benches put close by.
Twenty aluminum spoons studded with drops of water were piled in the center of the table for each eater to grab.
Next to the spoons lay a heavy dipper accompanied with twenty enamel cups adorned with combat scars from the pell-mell pileups in the dishwasher trough.
Two and a half multiply cross-sectioned loaves of ‘brick’-shaped brown bread on the crumpled aluminum tray provided twenty pieces too.
The cooks began throwing five-liter enameled pots on the ledger-shelf of the dispenser window issuing shrill indistinct.
The first meal in the army began.

The borshch was red and scorching hot.
It was brought in a pot from the dispenser window and shared into the bowls with the dipper.
Since the bowls were not to be changed the borshch should be eaten to get the second course, or refuse the first course at once and wait until the on-duty soldier would bring the next pot with pearl barley, also named ‘kirzookha'. 

(...if you carefully consider the fine pattern in the leather used for the tops of army kirza boots, you begin to understand the accuracy of the term ‘kirzookha’ for the army porridge…)

The porridge was liquid and as hot as the borshch.
Compote poured into the cups from aluminum kettles was not so hot, but also liquid.
The stunning din of a bustle in a railway station served the background for chewing and gulping.

On finishing the meal the tools of personal saturation had to be carried to the dishwasher window and put in the appropriate piles or stacks on the sill.
As they accumulate, the dishwashers themselves would topple the bowls, or spoons, or cups in the respective sections of the trough under the streams of steaming water from taps. 
Now we could leave the Canteen and return to the ‘training’ barrack so as not to miss the next command to fall in.

The following army experience showed that borshch did not happen for breakfasts and suppers, those started with ‘kirzookha’ at once, but in the morning next to the bread on the tables they put trays with inch by inch by half-inch cubes of yellow butter got from from the Bread-Cutter's window, which you spread on the bread with the same aluminum spoon handle.
If the butter was brought in one piece it was portioned by the most authoritative serviceman of those present at the table.
The piece of butter could also be reduced by a serviceman who started his army service a year and a half earlier and now approached your table to reward himself for his combat merits.
The lump sugar brought for tea would also do for an honored veteran...

On the whole, the ration was unpretentious but enough for survival. 
In autumn it became even simpler – water and cabbage for the first course, cabbage without water for the second, and water without cabbage for the third.
On a lucky day, you could see a lump of lard floating in your portion of the ‘kirzookha' porridge (the detachment had its pigsty, after all) but nothing beyond the lard. 
And on the Soviet holidays, they would add white buns for tea... 

At first, I couldn’t eat soldiers’ food.
Not that I was squeamish, but simply because of no matter how hard I tried I just couldn’t manage to stuff that ration into myself.
It just stuck in the throat.
At one of the meals a soldier from the previous draft seeing my diligent agony laughed and said:
‘No fear! You’ll get used and start to havvat anything.’
He was right.

The matter is that in the construction battalion they did not eat, but ‘havvat’.

‘The company went to havvat – catch on!'
'And what havvage is it today?'

As soon as I stopped eating and started havvating, everything fell into place.
At times I even havvatted an additional portion.

But that came later because if a soldier in his first half a year in the service—aka ‘young', or ‘salaga', or ‘salabon'—would approach the dispenser window with the bowl in his hands, the cook, most likely, would feel lazy to splash in it a scoop of havvage and shriek instead: 
‘Fuck you, salabon!’
Not because of being a genetic misanthropist, but just aping the attitude he had suffered from when being a ‘young' himself. 
However, he might and not start shrieking – exceptions happen anywhere.

(...in two years of army service, a Soviet soldier ascended the hierarchical ladder of servicemanship. 
The first six months he was a ‘salaga’, aka ‘young’, aka ‘salabon’.
For the next six months—after the following draft had brought in a new wave of ‘youngs'—he became a ‘dipper'. 
One year of service and two younger drafts behind raised him to ‘pheasants’.
For the concluding six months with no old-timers above him, he was ‘grandpa’.
And, at last, the Minister of Defence signed the order on the demobilization of the servicemen drafted, like him, two years ago: he turned into ‘dembel' to be dismissed with the arrival of the new draftees. 

The hierarchy terminology is not too hieroglyphic. 
‘Young’ meant the youngest in the service.
‘Dippers’ were entrusted with dealing the havvage out – for the ‘youngs’ too early, for the senior servicemen below their status.
‘Phesants' took in the width of their cotton pants to have them skin-tight close-fitting and started to stagger like dandies. 
‘Grandpa' was antipodal to ‘young', and ‘dembel' just a nice abbreviation for ‘demobilization'. 

To go through that ladder you had to live two years.
At the age of eighteen or twenty that quantity of time seems an eternity.
Besides, the quality of time in the army is unpredictable: some days fly by hardly having started, and vice versa – you feel that no less than a week had passed already – but no! – it’s still today.
The latter type of time amount in the army is greater than the first. 

The most miserable lot was that of ‘dembels’ who had pulled and pushed and dragged the un-embraceable lump of two years to the finish.
For them each hour became an eternity filled with soul trepidation, un-get-ridable anxiety, disbelief that that was possible at all. 

Soldiers on the lower rungs of the ladder tried to spur time by means of card calendars where all the twelve months of the year were printed on one side, and the other side called to keep money in the saving banks or fly by airplanes of the Aeroflot.
They ruthlessly pricked each day lived through with a needle, one by one.
The card calendars lost their glossy appeal, but when raised against the sky showed quads of pin-thick holes – one for a month lived through.
Calendar-pricking calls for a disciplined unswerving mind and remarkable willpower.
Not by a single pheasant had I seen such a calendar.
Eternity will humble anyone and crush any pride…)
catch up!’catch up!’
‘What havvage is it today?’
‘What havvage is it today?’
The first day of service ended midnight – we were trained to fit into forty-five seconds when going to sleep or getting up after it.

In the time specified, you had to remove all your outfit carefully stack the items on a stool in the central aisle lit with the long daylight lamps, to dive into your bunk in the ‘koobrik’ and cover yourself with a sheet and blanket.
Koobrik was composed of a dense group of four two-tier bunk beds separated from the neighboring koobriks by narrow passages where you collided with those who slept in the next koobrik. 

The collisions were just inevitable.
The width of the inter-koobrik passage was dictated by the cabinet-box in its end.
Forty-centimeter-wide cabinet-box squeezed from both sides by bunk beds made the width of the passage for eight newbies rushing to their bunks.
Oops!.

The cabinet-box was seventy centimeters high and had a drawer under its top.
The door beneath the drawer opened access to the shelves inside.
Those two shelves and the drawer were allotted to eight people—four from each koobrik—whose bunk beds towered above the half-meter-wide passage.

If in the passage there was a bunk bed of a ‘grandpa’ the whole cabinet-box was his, the drawer and both shelves, and that was not a matter for discussions.
If it were a ‘pheasant' in place of a ‘grandpa' he could share the lower shelf, still, not every ‘pheasant' would. 

Construction battalion trained you to live lightly, and not to burden yourself with things you could do without. 
As for the ‘Neva' blades and the machine of a safety razor, they could find a place on the shelf of the buddies from your draft who had neither oldies nor birds in the passage of their koobrik. 

Raising questions before commanding officers had undesirable backwash on the state of health.
The ‘pheasant-grandpa’ system was the pledge of military discipline in the army and an officer with a disregard to it was sawing off a bough he sat upon.
Therefore, in case of addressing him with some complaint, he complained about you to the ‘grandpas'. 
In the evening he went home after his day at the service and at night the ‘grandpas’ were spoiling your state of health.

Yet all that was to be discovered later, and now the sergeants were walking along the central aisle of the training barrack looking for a boot with a footcloth wound not accurately enough around its top, or a belt too carelessly dropped over the stool in a hurry, or the absence of any part of the outfit – the son of a bitch had dived under the blanket half-dressed! 
Finding where to find fault they commanded a general ‘get up!’ and the training began anew.
No chance that we started to do the job any better, most likely the sergeants themselves wanted to sleep. 
After another 'to beds!' they did not command ‘get up!' and the daylight lamps over the central aisle were switched off except for the one over the cabinet-box at the entrance to the barrack. 
Its remote light was not a hindrance, you could close your eyes and…
‘Get up!!’
What? What for?! O, shit, it’s morning! And where’s the night?

(...I have told already that time in the army is a dirty bitch, ain’t I?..)

A couple of ‘get up!’ were conducted but without nit-picking just to remind you’re in the army, bastards.
The reason for such leniency was the breakfast ahead and if we were late for it the cook-‘grandpa' would accost the sergeants with a ‘J'ai presque dû attendre' from the dispenser window. 

(...the kings of France had a special courtier in office to stomp a stick on the floor when the king was entering a hall in one of the royal palaces. 
And the stomper shouted his announcement:
‘His Majesty the King!’
And one day at the Louvre, Louis of Certain Number approaching the door to the general hall noticed that the Herald was not in place. 
Maybe, dropped around a corner to correct some kind of mess in his outfit…
But in the very last moment, from nowhere, the courtier with the stick ducked in the doorway and—as required by the statute—boomed bang into the floor. 
‘His Majesty the King!’
Actually, the King hadn’t even had to march on the spot and he, coming in, without much fuss reproached the servant in a royal way,
‘J'ai presque dû attendre.’
When translated from French, it means ‘I almost had to wait’…)

But the ‘grandpa' in the window would translate it another way, 
‘You fucking bitch! Got too fucking cocky, eh?
They threw the sergeant's snot across your shoulder-strap and you lost your sense of smell? I fucked you together with your rank! You be late once again and I'll have you dispense the pots. You fucking cock!' 
And the sergeant would have nothing to parry such a translation with because if though being not a ‘cock' yet for the current moment he still was just a ‘pheasant'. 

(...What on earth could any king have to do with our construction battalion?
The most intimate connection.
Unofficially, the military construction battalions—aka conbats—of the Soviet Army were named ‘the royal troops’.
Got that under your belt?
On we go.
The outfit of the military conbat soldier, aka conbatist, consisted of a khaki fore-and-aft cap with a small red-cherry star screwed in its bow with the still smaller yellow sickle-and-hammer inside.
The star was a very important detail.
Its role was to determine the front and end parts of the headgear.
On the strength of its shape, the fore-and-aft cap was no use to protect the soldier’s ears.
When caught in the strong wind or rain you could turn off the cap’s flaps and pull that on the skull, but that gave the serviceman the appearance of a mugger in a ‘condom’ hat.
Under certain circumstances the conbatist could even put his fore-and-aft cap across his head, that is, with the star transferred into position above the ear.
The trick was supposed to present a motif ‘a la Tricorn of Bonaparte', however, on the whole, that looked like a fucking moron with the star on the side of his fucking gibbosity. 

The head of the conbat soldier could alternately be covered with a forage cap, but, according to the statute, the forage cap should be accompanied by the jacket and trousers over the blunt-nosed high shoes of black leather. 
Such a set was briefly referred to as ‘parade-crap' (ceremonial uniform) with black shoulder-straps on the shoulders of the jacket. 

(...black is always in fashion…)

The black insignia fields in the collar of the ceremonial outfit were decorated with miniature emblems of military construction troops of a yellow alloy. 
The same emblem was repeated in a larger size on the forearm part of the jacket sleeve, but already without any metal impurities. 

The Brief Heraldic Explication of the Canbat Emblem

“The Battalion Commander pours forth thunder and lightning;
The Ensign trots like a squirrel in the wheel;
but I dropped the anchor and don't care a fuck, so they cannot drive me onward even with a fucking bulldozer." 

Between the parade-crap lapels peeped a khaki shirt and a tie of a darker khaki with the elastic string—like that in underpants—hidden under the collar and secretly holding the tie in place.

But let’s come back to the casual (everyday) uniform the upper part of which (the cap) was already discussed.
The innermost layer of it was underpants and a tank-shirt (in winter long-sleeve undershirt and long johns).
Then came the cotton khaki jacket without any shoulder straps (in case you got some rank distinguished by the number of yellow strips across the shoulder strap then everything needed for the insignia you’d find yourself).
The jacket was fastened in front with five buttons made of light plastic with the bas-relief of the star with sickle and hammer crossed in its center. 
The skirts of the jacket reached the middle of the thighs.
On both sides—just below the waist—straight pockets with flaps above them so that the earth and sand did not get in while digging holes.
The buttons in the wide sleeve cuffs were of the same green plastic and same design but smaller in size.
Under the left breast of the jacket, there was an inner sack-like pocket of a khaki canvas. 

The casual form trousers were a peak of pragmatism – two cotton pipes of legs narrowing downwards overlaid with large patches on knees for hardening and prolonging the service life of the item; two upright pockets on the hips; one fly with small buttons bearing no emblems.
(At the ends of legs there were inch-wide strips sewn across the openings but those were cut off at once so that they wouldn't fuck your brains and rub your feet.) 

In winter the cap was replaced by a hat with ear-flaps made of artificial gray fur.
The fastening strings at the flap end allowed for wearing such a hat in four distinct manners: 
1.   ‘ears up'-type, (crown of King Solomon); 
2.   ‘ears under the back of the head'-type, (cautious rabbit); 
3.   ‘ears loosened’-type, (proud hawk coasting);
4.   ‘ears tied under the chin’-type, (a partner for sparring).

A padded jacket constituted the outmost layer worn in winter.
Upright stitches keeping the wool lining in place made the jacket look like a hybrid of epic heroes combat outfit and concentration camp uniform only in just one khaki color.

Instead of a padded jacket, a soldier could wear a pea jacket with the smooth surface. 
The latter surpassed the padded jacket in many ways.
Firstly, there was twice as much of wool in its lining and hence it was warmer.
Secondly, it extended long to the middle of the thighs, covering the groin and buttock from the nasty extremes of winter weather.

And one final return to the parade-crap.
A double-breasted overcoat of cloth-felt was added to it in winter.
It ended a bit below the knees and had two vertical rows of yellow buttons on the breast (one of them decorative).
Behind—across the sacrum—there was sewn a short decorative length of a belt with two decorative buttons on its ends under which, just below the rectum, started the vertical gash dividing the skirts – in case of a need of quickening the pace or for any other needs.

The last but not least, the wide belt of sturdy tarpaulin with the weighty metal plate-buckle which could be used for a host of purposes starting from digging a hole up to becoming a lethal weapon in a fight as a mace on a string, sort of.

Here, in short, how a soldier of construction battalion, aka conbatist, was dressed.

Though we, the spring draft of 1973, at first were honored and trusted to finish off the Russian and Red Armies' tunics of the classic model, which had been inherited and kicking back around in the warehouses of the Soviet Army. 
Later, when we had worn them off to tatters and they became a rarity the ‘pheasants’ were pissing with boiling water to get such a one, unlike everyone’s else.

A comparative analysis of the component items in the outfit of a conbatist serviceman proves that the most idiotic piece of it was the forage cap in which it's uncomfortable to sleep because of its hard visor and which it's impossible to pull over your ears…) 

Each barracks entrance had an outside entrance hall in the middle of the barrack’s long wall.
The hall was a three by three low-ceiling vestibule paved with large gray tiles and with large lattice windows in all the length of its side walls.
Outside the front door, a rectangular grating of parallel rebars covered a shallow concrete pit to give room for the dirt scraped off the boots with the grating. 
Near the vestibule, there stood an open gazebo about the same size with a bench of three beams running along its plank sides. 
The four-sided roof rested on the posts in the gazebo corners.
In the center of the cemented floor there again was a pit but with round walls for the servicemen to throw their cigarette butts in, the on-duty soldiers would eventually clean the pit up.
Next to the gazebo, there was put a two-meter-long footrest for several people to put their one or another foot on when polishing their boots. 

Anything omitted?
Oh, yes! And the grass on both sides of the asphalt path.

When the sergeants got bored of drilling us in the drill ground between the Gate and the Canteen and the Sorteer or tired of driving it home to us the meaning of lines in the booklet of the Internal Service Statute they commanded the eradication of ragweed. 

I had used to think that ambrosia was a cheerful drink at the feasts of the eternally young, immortal gods of Olympus but it turned out to be a terribly harmful grass.
We were shown sheets with the printed text and the culprit's black and white picture – wanted, find and eradicate. 
The hay fever spreading offender should be liquidated.

That was a good job because the sergeants disappeared for an hour or so and we could talk and get acquainted in no hurry.
From Konotop, for instance, I was the only one but there were a lot of fellow countrymen from the Sumy region – of Buryn, Krolevets, Shostka cities.
In general, the entire spring draft to VSO-11 was from Ukraine, only the guys from Dnepropetrovsk were brought before us.
They had already undergone the training and distributed to the companies of the battalion.
Taking advantage of the sergeants’ absence a couple of them sneaked into the gazebo to collect the cigarette butts from the round hole which we had thrown there at the command to fall in.

Nobody really knew why poor Ambrosia was hunted so severely down and it was nowhere to be seen around but the talks in the grass helped to temporarily forget about the eternity that had befallen us for the following two years...

In the newly acquired outfit, it was hard to get trained for ‘get up!' command, the buttons balked at getting in and out of the buttonholes. 
On the advice of Vitya Strelyany, I widened them with an aluminum spoon handle in the Canteen and they began to fly in and out nice and swiftly... 

The immediate goal of the drill training was to sell ourselves on the Oath Day.
All in all, there were three platoons in the ‘training' barrack with one and the same song for them all which was often aired by the ‘Mayak' Radio Station. 

‘In two winters,
Merely in two winters,
In two summers,
Merely in two summers
I’ll do my service in the army
And come back to you...’

After the first platoon circled round and round the drill ground in parade march singing it in chorus until they did ‘stop! One-two!', the second platoon marched into the same ground singing the same song and it became unbearably long. 
And then, after them, we, the third platoon, stomped in yelling about the third pair of winters and summers which was an obvious redundancy. 
Even among the recruits there was restrained giggling, the sergeants of the first and second platoons laughed outright and our sergeant became nervous.
When I told him I could prepare another song for us to sing, only I needed a pen and paper, he did not immediately understand what I was talking about but then I was set free from the drill ground to do creative work for the benefit of the platoon.
The paper and pen would be given by the on-duty soldier from the cabinet-box at the entrance.

The first thing you saw on entering the barracks was a soldier standing at the cabinet-box.
The soldier was an on-duty serviceman and the cabinet-box was his watch.
From that post, he had to issue the command ‘Company! At attention!' when an officer entered the barracks. 
There were two on-duty servicemen daily.
They replaced each other at the watch by the cabinet-box every four hours and at the meal time, the one free from the watch went to the Canteen under command of the sergeant on-duty to lay the tables for the company servicemen to have their havvage. 
Those three (the on-duty sergeant and the two private men) were called ‘duty unit' and remained it for the stretch of twenty-four hours. 

The on-duty sergeant was surprised by my request but he gave me the needed pen and paper.
I went to the room in the end of the aisle which the company political Commander, aka zampolit,  called ‘Leninist room’ because of its walls were paneled with yellow chipboard and next to the mirror there was the Leader’s profile painted with two colors, but in the soldiers’ lingo it was ‘live-mains’ because of the wall sockets for an iron or electric razors and the mirror wide enough for two or three of shaving themselves at once.

Music was not the problem – everybody knew the perennial hit:

‘Maroosya, a black-haired girl,
Picked berries
Of gelder rose...' 

But not everyone knew that originally it was the song ‘Take the harness, guys, off your horses...' which meant that it got used to transformations of its lyrics: 

‘Our parade march is the best,
And our song’s the loudest,
That’s the tune
Of our platoon!..’

Siting over a sheet of paper I twirled the pen in my fingers picking up words in my mind, fitting them this or that way.
And the Leninist live-mains around me, and the cotton smell from my uniform and the smarting itch of my right foot rubbed to bleeding faded into the background. 
I was in AWOL from the army...

Yes, we learned and sang it.

At the end of the day, the rookies stood at ease about the entrance to the ‘training' barrack. 
The master sergeant of the fourth company passed by – a man of about forty with a good-natured face and a paunch of the potbelly. 
He stopped to ask where we were drafted from.
Probably, he wanted to while away the half an hour till five o’clock when the ensigns and officers and the pair or two of women from the accountancy at the Detachment Staff were taken to the Stavropol-City.
Only the on-duty officer stayed for the night in the battalion.

One of us, Vanya by his name, seeing the human disposition of the senior in rank, ingratiatingly smiled and asked: 
‘Comrade master sergeant, could they exempt me because of this?’
He lowered his head and rested his index finger in a wide scar on his pate surrounded by the bristles of the close-cut.
‘Fucking smartie, gonna fuck the army?’, said the master sergeant. ‘No fucking way!’
And he slapped Vanya’s shoulder blades with his broad fatty hand.
From the sonorous spank, Vanya bent in the opposite direction and painfully pursed his lips: 
‘Ouch!’
The soldiers readily laughed to the joke of the senior in the rank...

As for the tactical drills, I even liked them. 
All the three platoons of rookies were formed into one column and marched out of the battalion grounds to the field next to the pigsty.
The sergeants explained that ‘flash’ meant a nuclear bomb explosion and it was necessary to drop flat on the ground with your head in the flash's direction.
Then the command ‘run march!’ followed and when the whole column moved to a disorderly trot one of the sergeants yelled:
‘Flash on right!’
With animated screams, we fell incongruously on the grass. 
The drill was repeated for several times.

(...when we ourselves became ‘grandpas’ and the servicemen from my draft recollected those ‘flash on left!’ and ‘flash on right!’ as one of the inhuman trials for the startup ‘youngs’ I could not understand them.
I still do not understand.
Running in the summer field, tumbling in the green grass when there is strength and wish – it’s fun!

‘How young we were at that time!
How young we were at that time!.’...)

After the fatigue denying and hard training in the unforgettable four days, we took the Military Oath and became serviceman of the armed forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 
No, we did not hold any automatic or other kind weapons as was the Soviet Army custom for that ceremonial event. 

We took turns stepping out of the ranks to the desk on the asphalt path, picked up the sheet with the printed text of the Oath, read it, put it back onto the desk, signed another sheet (the lieutenant indicated the place for the signature) and stepped back to the ranks to turn about and face the long wall of the barrack made of white silicate brick laid in shiner position.

Behind the desk, facing our ranks, two officers stood.
If someone of the Oath Takers did not quite get along with the reading they did not really pick on him – just finish it off quick and scribble your scratch on the sheet. 

In the end, the lieutenant asked if anyone had a medical education. 
After a moment of refrained disarray in the ranks, a young soldier stepped out and reported that he was helping the paramedic at the first-aid post in his village.
He was kept to continue his service at the fourth company as well as four professional drivers from our draft.

(… how many times in the two years that followed I cursed myself with every taboo word under the sun for not stepping forward to report my three years of preparation for entering the medical institute for the department of neurosurgery!.) 

Then they announced us who belonged to which company.
I got in the first – the company of masons.
The second and the third were plasterers.
The forth was for drivers and everything else there.

We were taken to the respective barracks and presented to the Commanders of our squads.
Those indicated free bunk beds in the koobriks of the empty barracks because at that time of day the company personnel was working on construction sites in the city... 

There hardly could be found more disgusting sounds in all the living nature than the cursed command ‘company! get up!’

(...anticipatorily, I should confess that I myself when being an on-duty serviceman and having waited for the hands in the large square clock above the watch cabinet-box to show exactly six o’clock in the morning inhaled deeply and yelled in the meanest voice I could manage:
‘Companyeeeeeeee! Get uuuuuup!’
Eye for an eye.
An ear for the tortured ear…) 

After the first night in the barracks of the first company in the cabinet-box of the koobrik, I slept in of all my personal belongings there remained only a pack of razor blades ‘Neva' priced 25 kopecks. 
The disappearance of the toothbrush and cream together with the razor shaving machine was not so depressing as the disappearance of 30 kopecks from the pocket in my cotton pants. 
That was enough for two packs of cigarettes ‘Prima’.
I recollected the guys from Dnepropetrovsk picking up cigarette butts from the trash pit in the ‘training’ barrack gazebo.

Having meticulously covered my bed with the blanket (otherwise, the on-duty serviceman would rip it off and demand to do it better) I threw the army waffle towel around my neck as everyone else around and went to the Sorteer in the general flow of khaki color. 
Over each of the ten hole-ochcos, someone was squatting there attended by a waiting line of two or three and even the wall-width-long urinal runnel was not accessible at once. 
There was a babel of tinkling, farting and exchanging news of the past day. 
‘He was rat-arsed then?’
‘You knows yoursel.’
‘Got caught?’
‘I am fucked if I know. They were looking for him.' 
‘He’ll get caught.’
‘You knows yoursel.’

At the washstand trough, they milled the same piece of news but in detail. 

By eight o'clock the on-duty sergeants had driven the ‘youngs' and ‘dippers' of their companies to the drill ground and carried out the complex of exercises. 
The companies had had their breakfast and got loosely lined, four rows deep, on the drill ground except for those ‘grandpas'  who fucking fucked all falling-ins. 

At a little to eight, the ‘goat'-Willis of the Battalion Commander and a small bus with the officers and accountants pulled up at the Gate. 
The Battalion Commander, the Political Second-in-command, aka Zampolit, and the Chief of Staff went to the middle of the drill ground, the officers joined the lines of their respective companies, the accountants bypassed the barrack of the third company heading to the barrack of the fourth – half of that building was the Staff of VSO-11. 
The Dispensing got started.

The on-duty officer reported to the Commanders that during the last day there were no incidents or violations in the Construction Unit 11. 
The Chief of Staff ordered two soldiers from the Third Company to step out and face the ranks. 
The day before they violated military discipline at the construction sites in the city.
He announced the penalty – ten days of arrest.

The gray-haired Battalion Commander, turning his horn-rimmed glasses from side to side started his prosecution harangue.
His oratories were beyond the comprehension because of his brain marasmus – getting to the middle of a sentence he jumped to another of which though too no more than a half was produced.
Behind the Battalion Commander's back, the Separate Company was approaching along the asphalt path on their way to the Canteen for their breakfast havvage. 
They fucking fucked all that Dispensing, they were the Separate Company not belonging to VSO-11.

Finally, Zampolit told the Battalion Commander that was enough for the rhetoric.
The Batallion Commander fired off a pair of concluding 'fucks' and shut up.
The on-duty officer passed his responsibilities to another officer who’d stand on duty for the following twenty-four hours.
The discipline violators surrendered their belts to the new on-duty sergeant and plodded to the checkpoint house where there would be locked up in the clink, the dark room with the tin paneled door and no windows at all but with decking of planks to lie upon. 
The Chief of Staff ordered to march to our workplaces. 

We walked to the Gate with the truck already waiting for us behind it.
The Battalion Commander started up – a shred of a sentence that had slipped off when he was at it landed back into Colonel Lieutenant's brain  
Fuck yourself, fucker! The Dispensing’s over!

We’re already boarding the trucks – a foot on the wheel, hands grabbing the back plank-side, swing over it and rush further so that the next one wouldn’t land on you.
Off we go!
 The Gate stayed behind.
The wall of white brick panels between the white brick pillars ran by on the left.
We’re going to the city!.

In the end, it turned out to be a suburb with the construction site in the remnants of a forest belt. 
A nine-story residential building of two sections. 
The walls laid of white silicate brick had been raised to the fifth story level.

The Commander of our team-squad ordered to stack bricks on pallets from the brick heap piled high by the dump trucks. 

The pallet was four thick planks one meter twenty of length nailed to a pair transverse beams of ninety by six by six centimeters, which became the pallet’s footing so that the steel cable slings of the tower crane would easily pass under the pallet.
Twelve courses 300 bricks made for about one cubic meter of masonry, but the bricks should be stacked on a pallet retaining the bond pattern so that the pallet load wouldn’t pour down when the crane hoisted it to the bricklayers up the walls.

In fact, the job was not too hard, but it turned out that silicate dust gnawed into palms’ skin and they did not give us protective canvas mittens.
Grisha Dorfman plaintively observed his hands.
Besides, the white dust clung to our boots and tunics and was hard to shake off, but they did not give us any overalls. 

The same truck took us back to the Detachment for the midday meal.
The passers-by on the sidewalks did not care to look at the conbatists in a passing truck.
Outside the city where we turned from the highway a little off of the road to the Detachment there stood a clump of industrial buildings.
The buddies from our team-squad started yelling and waving in that direction like football fans when their team enters the field.
Vitya Strelyany reluctantly explained that was a zone there.
Now, that’s clear – solidarity.

(...30% of the servicemen in the construction battalions were the citizens who had served their time in prison for not too serious crimes. 
The majority of remaining 70% were considered fit for non-combatant military service because of their health conditions or, like me, were not smart enough to dodge out of the army. 
At the rare bubbles of clarity from his chronic brain marasmus, our Battalion Commander was able to give out clear-cut definitions:
‘The rabble of cripples and jail-birds, fuck the whore of your mother!’..)

From work, we were brought already at dusk.
The Evening Check after the supper was conducted by the Company Commander Captain Pissak.
The servicemen fell into two ranks divided into two formations by the cabinet-box at the entrance to the barracks. 
The ‘youngs’ (so was the law) filled the front rank.
Facing the soldiers, Captain Pissak called the roll without looking up from the list, just listening to the responses. 
‘Here!’
‘Here!’
‘Here!’
He could determine the current state of a serviceman by the voice timbre used for that ‘Here!’

When the roll call reached the ‘youngs', Pissak was approaching and standing against each of the new ‘Here!' and for a few seconds silently probed your face with an unblinking gaze from under the black visor of his forage cap. 
Then he called out the next one.
That was enough – his photographic memory had remembered you for two years ahead and a month later, instead of:
‘What’s your name, private?’
He would say:
‘Private Ogoltsoff!’
‘Yes, Comrade Captain!’
‘Are you thief-swaggering?’
‘No, Comrade Captain!’
‘Then why your belt plate is dropped to your balls? Sergeant Batochkin!’
‘Yes, Comrade Captain!’
‘Five fatigues to private Ogoltsoff.’
‘Yes, Comrade Captain!’
Well, yes, when we were approaching the nine-story building I loosened the belt over my tunic a bit.
How could I know he would pop up from the forest belt?.

That day I tried my best to curry favor with the sergeant.
He sent me to plane the ground with a spade for laying the curbstones. 
How I was fucking it!
Two hundred meters if not more.
Maybe the sergeant, seeing my zeal, would blink at the fatigues?

‘Two conbatists full of vigor
Can dig more than a power digger...' 

Two passers-by on the nearby sidewalk were so impressed with my working style that approached me inviting to partake in drinking wine from the bottle they were carrying.
‘No. Thank you! I cannot.’

At the evening check, the sergeant beckoned to me with his finger – ‘on the floors!' 
‘On the floors’ meant – after all would lie down in their bunk beds, you sweep the aisle and the passages in the koobriks, bring water from the washstand by the sorteer and do the wet cleaning of the entire sixty-seven-meter long barracks with its koobriks and the vestibule.
Do it in two steps: first with a thoroughly wet rag, then wash it, squeeze dry and repeat Step One.
And the oftener you change the water, the better so that there remained no dimmed spots in the floors.
Then report to the on-duty sergeant to check the job done.
And if he accepted it at once, you could retreat and rejoice that that evening you were not sent ‘on the floors' to the Canteen. 
Climb into your bunk bed and the moment your head touched the pillow you’ll hear:
‘Companyeeeeee! Get uuuup!’

‘They took Vanya to the nuthouse.' 
‘What Vanya?’
‘You knows yoursel. Scar on the pate.’
‘What for?’
‘Did not get up in the morning. Says mice crawled into his boots.’
‘Dodging or fucked in the head?’
‘Who fucking knows? They will check.’

The first day off we had in August.
Till then from half-past eight till twilight they kept us slavering on construction sites. 
And suddenly – a whole Sunday in the Detachment.
The ‘youngs’ washed their dusted uniforms.
They placed the washing on the brick wall and roamed around in black underpants and white tank-shirts and kirza boots, like those sports Fritzes in the movie ‘One chance in a thousand’.

During the period till the first day off our team-squad dropped the habit of saluting with screams and whistles the zone by the roadside.
And in fine morning weather didn't stop in our tracks anymore to stare before the breakfast at the faraway wonder – the snow-clad top of the Elbrus Mountain hovering in the sky over the pigsty. 
Private Alimonov, aka Alimosha, taught me to smoke a butt of cigarette ‘Prima’ shared by buddies until there remained three millimeters of the tobacco wrapping paper...

And one time we even got paid.
The master sergeant of the First Company, a gray-haired man under fifty, well imbibed, called us one by one to his ware-room and meted out one rouble plus kopecks to each, adding a piece of white cloth for for under-collars, a pair of shoe polish tins, and a spool of threads for sewing the under-collars up. 
But in the payroll, we had signed for three roubles and eighty kopecks because of everyone knew, whoever you would ask, that the Soviet Army serviceman monthly payment was 3 rub. 80 kop.
That was as indisputable an axiom as that of the Volga River and the Caspian Sea.

Midsummer, at one of the evening checks the company zampolit announced that my wife, at her request, was sent a paper certifying that I was in the army. 

‘You did not say you were married, Goly!' 
‘You hadn’t asked.’

(...they had no time for marriage doing their stretch in the penitentiary colonies for juvenile offenders… )

Olga, Konotop, the Plant, dances seemed to be something unreal, from another faraway life.
I was receiving letters from her.

“...and in the evenings when I see how girls are walking with their guys and I am all alone and by myself it hurts so that I am crying...”

Mother also sent letters to me, and brother and sister wrote a couple of times as well.
I did not know what to write in response.
‘Hello, I’ve received your letter, many thanks for it..’
And then? What else to write?
‘...in two winters, in two summers...’?
Nothing entered my head.
And I already couldn't think a shortest thought without ‘fuck’ and ‘fucking’ within it.
A fucking dickhead!
Just to think of it – my closest kin people and that feeling of detachedness in me.

Detachedness?

Well, something alike to what I felt when in the end of the day we were already sitting in the back of a truck under the white wall of the unfinished nine-story building and waited for a ‘grandpa' bricklayer changing into his uniform. 
Some other ‘grandpa’, already in the back, began to get at Misha Khmelnitsky—just so, to idle the time—for his being a Khokhol, aka a Ukrainian.
Misha, looking aside, muttered that he was not a Ukrainian and only had that kind of the last name. 
We all sat in silence.
The ‘grandpa’ started to laugh – what a lousy draft they brought from Ukraine with not a single Khokhol.
‘Okay, I’m a Ukrainian, so what of that?’
Only when those words somehow echoed back from the brick wall looming whitish in the twilight I realized that it was said by me.
It’s strange to hear yourself from outside if you did not expect that.
Some kind of self-detachedness.
The ‘gradpa’ shut up.
And really – what of that? Or of anything else?.

Later Misha Khmelnitsky revealed to me that he was also married and he even shared some intimate details that he always had an itch to take a leak into his wife’s cunt after he cum, just for fun, but it never came out.
Making no comments, I rejoiced in my mind that the evolution process of the homo sapiens species anticipated an anatomical mechanism to prevent fucking jokes of such fucked in the head funny fuckers.

Of course, my comrades in arms did not know such words as ‘evolution’ or ‘sapiens’ but they could retell from memory certain articles from the book of the Criminal Code.
‘And what had you got locked up for?’
‘Article six hundred seventeen, part two with aggravating circumstances.’
‘Brain-fucker, you! There’s no such article!.’
‘Was recently introduced – for cannibalism.’

It turned out that tattoo was not just an ornamental decoration, but an esoteric message for the initiated – of what crime convicted, how far had got advanced in the Zone Table of Ranks the wearer of the tattooed skin. 
And those with life terms were doing tattoos on their forehead running ‘Slave of the USSR'. 

But then again, not all were the same.
I saw a guy who came after his term in Zone with neat three words on his forearm in quite a modest typeface –  “in vino veritas’.
With such a tattoo one could pass off for a Doctor of Philosophy.
Some fucking Latinist...

There were certain taboos too.
A try to exaggerate personal achievements of the tattoo bearer or to unlawfully add to his status in the criminal milieu by means of pics he was not entitled to, called for a severe, brutal—at times the capital—punishment. 

And one should be careful about using the word ‘waffles’.
After we got that payment, Alimosha visited the Military Store at the Gate and pointing his finger at a pack of waffles told the saleswoman:
‘Gimme of those grid biscuits.’
But the trick did not save him.
‘Hey, Alimosha! Got missing waffles, eh?' 
‘Go and fuck yourself!’ snapped Alimosha back.
The innocent word of ‘waffles’ had got polluted with the meaning ‘cum’, thence the pun.

(...and how not to come to admiration, not to arose emotionally from the unpretentiously artless but so poetically provocative mocking couplet-duels of the Zone folklore?

‘I have fucked you at the gate,
And can present a certificate!..’

‘I have fucked you in grass dew,
Here’s a reference for you!..’

‘I have fucked you in raspberries
Together with your references!..' 

And, putting the final victorious period:

‘Nothing to parry with? No ace?
Grab my dick and wipe your face!..’…)

Besides play on words there happened and practical jokes, of course.

After the midday meal, we were standing by the Gate waiting for the truck. 
Sasha Khvorostyuk and Vitya Strelyany had razor-shaved their heads the night before and stood out among us with white-skinned pates above their densely tanned mugs.
‘I say, would I look like a dick with a scratch across my pate now?’ Vitya asked me.
‘No worry, buddy, you look that without any scratch.’
‘Do me a favor, grab my ears and jerk it. Please, Oh, please!’
Who would refuse so earnest appeal of a buddy?
Naturally, I did as asked.
‘Ptui-ptui-ptui-ptui...’
I did not understand at once – the white saliva of tiny spits dribbled on my tunic chest.
‘I’ve cum...’ explained Vitya.

The truck pulled up by the checkpoint with a team-squad of plasterers of our draft but from Dnepropetrovsk.
They walked through the open gate.
Five ‘dippers’ shot from the checkpoint door besetting a mighty ‘young’ like a pack of wolves hunting a bull.
But no, he turned out a too hard prey for them and the pack retreated uttering threats.
The bull picked up his cap knocked off in the skirmish.
We kept the policy of non-interference to the internal affairs of the third company.
The driver of the arrived truck honked us to climb into the back...

The walls of the nine-story building were laid even at night under a garland of electric bulbs suspended above the wall portion in progress.
Two soldiers from our draft were transferred to the night shift – a lanky buddy who worked as a bricklayer before the army and me. 
He was at once integrated into the line of the servicemen laying the wall and I got a shovel to bring the mortar, aka ‘dirt’, from a nearby iron box.

The tower crane with an indistinguishable face of the soldier-operator in his cab under the crane-beam loomed motionless in the dark of night behind the wall. 
The bricklayers entreated the operator to hoist a kettle of drinking water for them but he was too lazy to go all the way down the ladder inside the crane's tower and then climb back. 
And there was no one down there to fill the kettle with water from the water pipe by the mound of mortar on the ground. 
Finally, one of the bricklayers climbed on a pallet with bricks, grabbed the steel cables of the ‘spider' (the bundle of four steel cables) and stepped onto two of its hooks hanging by idly. 
The operator switched on the rumbling noise of his crane, raised and turned away the beam carrying the figure standing on the hooks far down where a lonely light-bulb was burning by the mortar mound. 

Safety regulations?
The royal troops lived by the concepts of their own.

From below the crane brought a pallet of bricks with the kettle on top.
The pallet was put by the wall between the working bricklayers and they commanded the operator to take the cables away.
One of the spider’s hooks caught the ‘young’ bricklayer stooping over the wall with a trowel in his hand by the belt strapped over his pea jacket and lifted him into the air.
The rise was not too high – about a meter or so, because of the whistles and cries from the others to put him back down.
The operator executes the command and the incident was over, but what did the fellow felt hanging up in the air and kicking his long legs and shouting ‘enough! enough!'? 

(...probably, it happened just by chance, because the ‘grandpas’ in the line were also shouting ‘down!’ to the operator…)

Then the bricklayers' sergeant-foreman went to the far corner of the erected section, stood on the wall edge and took a leak down onto the distant remains of the forest belt with an arc-shaped squirt dashed by gleams reflecting the lights of the bulb-garland. 

‘Nothing gives a nicer sight
Than pissing from the hight..’

He jumped off the corner and joined the bricklayers' line to go on with laying the wall... 

Though not always everyone easily got off with anything.

Two soldiers grabbed each other in a mock-wrestling over the elevator shaft.
Or rather, the bigger guy grabbed the smaller one.
Hefty yokels are more prone to the like fun. 

They both fell into the shaft and broke through the safety boarding one story lower.
Due to the law of acceleration of bodies in free fall, the bigger one was the first to reach the bottom of the shaft and got flattened against the piles of construction debris down there.
The smaller guy came a second later landing on the gone off joker and got off with heavy fractures.
After the rehabilitation, he was not exempted though and served until his demobilization as a watchman at various construction sites of VSO-11... 

Every other month at the Morning Dispensing they were reading the circulation orders about servicemen killed as a result of malicious violations of safety regulations in the military construction units of the Baku Air Defense District, which our construction battalion reported to...

All the ‘youngs’ at the beginning of their service get ‘burdened’ but our squad was the ‘youngest’ of all the ‘youngs’.
Such situation resulted from a chain of unfavorable circumstances.

The ensign, who was our platoon commander, caught the sergeant, who was our squad commander, with two bottles of wine bought from a nearby deli.

What is ensign?
That’s a ‘grandpa’ who liked thief-swaggering (wow! the ‘youngs’ got cold feet before him!) and who realized that after the demobilization, in the civilian life, he’d be nothing.

(...the civilian life has other kinds of hierarchies…)

That’s why such a ‘grandpa’ remains in the army for a long-term service.
After four months of training at a school of ensigns, he comes back to the same detachment with a small star in his shoulder straps. 
He wears the parade-crap, he roughs the soldiers, and he gets paid for it one hundred twenty rubles a month.
How not to sympathize with a person who has found his place in life?

So, our squad was called to and collected from different places in the nine-story building construction site—some of us were laying partition walls, others digging a trench, still, others loading bricks on pallets—and ordered to fall in by the entrance to the second section. 
Our sergeant was facing the line without his belt—an obvious sign of being under the arrest—two bottles of wine (0.5 liters, wide red sticker) by his feet on the ground. 
The fair-haired ensign in a short-sleeved parade-crap shirt (the summer had just started) took the position at the flank of our dust-covered-dirt-smeared formation.

In short, that whelp, who was not even a ‘grandpa’ already, decided to perform a didactic oratorio.
Like, this traitor of the homeland treacherously left his comrades in arms at their labor post and deserted to the grocery store, but the vigilant ensign caught him red-handed.

He finished his righteous bullshit, snuffed and didn’t know what to do next.

However, he seemed to have watched some TV serial from the life of military cadets where someone got a parcel mailed from home and ate it on the sly without sharing to other cadets.
Then he got caught and the cadet school zampolit forced him to eat a bar of chocolate in front of the rank of his comrades.
The miser with his head bowed, burning with shame, implored to forgive him.
End of the sequel.

And so, that Pestalozzi with a single star in his shoulder straps started to peacock himself for the TV zampolit before us:
‘And you let your comrades down for wine! Well, well… Then drink it!' 

He did not consider that in real life movies might go the way not foreseen by the screenplay...
Instead of bowing his head the sergeant threw it back and clapped the bottle's neck to his lips executing the received order.
The ensign froze in his place, our rank sympathetically swallowed along with the sergeant's gulps and the bottle was finished at one go.
He did not have time for the second though – the ensign sprinted to it and smashed against a heap of gravel. 
The sergeant was taken to the detachment and locked up in the clink at the checkpoint house.
Next morning he was busted to a private and sent to the team he was working with before they brought our draft to VSO-11.
And might it be otherwise?
Who would allow him to kick back in the clink for ten days and chew the bread for nothing?
March to work!
After all, even without the tattoo on the forehead all of us were slaves of the USSR...

Our squad got a new commander, an ordinary ‘dipper’, by the name of Prostomolotov.
‘Call me simply – Molotov.’

An intellectual wearing glasses, he knew about Molotov, but he was nothing more than a ‘dipper’ and though they gave him the rank of lance-corporal the ‘grandpas’ were pushing him around and he was in cold sweat before them and never hinted to ‘burden’, at least occasionally, some other squad of ‘youngs’.

For that reason, after a day's work instead of going to bed, we went to the kitchen and peeled potatoes to feed the next day the entire servicemen personnel plus that of the Separate Company. 
All night long. 
Until five in the morning.
True, the last sack potatoes we smuggled out to the garbage bins covering the buckets with potato peels.
And at six ‘get up!’, then the Morning Dispensing and to work.

Or else, they brought us in the evening from work to eat the havvage and then took back to the nine-story building because KAMAZ trucks were moving there alabaster from the railway station and if it rained the whole carload of the valuable building material would be lost.
And we, standing knee-deep in loose alabaster, drove it with shovels into the basement of the nine-story building through the opening in the blocks of the foundation under the end wall. 
As soon as we finished one hillock of it, another KAMAZ truck would come and dump its load, and then another and then another…
And inside the basement the alabaster had also be driven into the next compartment, otherwise, all of it wouldn't fit in. 

(...I will not forget the cyanotic complexion of Vasya, drafted from Buryn, in the light of the basement bulb when he fell asleep on an alabaster dune…) 

In short, Simply-Molotov, the conbat saying was right:
‘It's better to have a prostitute daughter, than a lance-corporal son.' 

Dad of Grisha Dorfman arrived and had a talk with someone in the Staff barrack.
He left and Grisha was transferred to the Fourth Company and given the position of a tailor.
Soon, Grisha already flaunted in ‘Pe-Sha’ and didn’t even spent nights in the barracks because he had a sewing workshop in the bathhouse.
‘Pe-Sha’ meant ‘half-woolen outfit’ the cloth is thicker than cotton, aka ‘Khe-Be’, and was the color of dark swampy slime – one of the khaki shades.
‘Pe-Sha’ was worn by aristocrat-servicemen: the driver of the Battalion Commander’s ‘goat’-Willis, or the projectionist at the Club, who was also the postman.
It’s a great thing to have a dad who knows how to negotiate.

And Vanya, who feared the mice in his boots, got exempted from the army.
The sergeant who escorted him home from the nuthouse told that at the Stavropol station Vanya threw the mesh-bag with his belongings wrapped in a newspaper to the floor and shouted:
‘Run! Run away! It’s a bomb! It’s ticking!’
People shied away.
And when they arrived at Vanya’s home he said for a goodbye:
‘Learn, sergeant, the way smart guys serve in the army.' 

That’s, in general, why on that day-off in August trying to go off the lazy crowd of beach-lizards in kirza boots, I turned at the Club corner and from the rebar grated window, next to the back porch under the door to the projectionist’s, I heard an acoustic guitar.
Guitar…

I stood still and listened, though there was nothing to listen to – someone clumsily tried to play the chords of ‘Shyz-Gara’ but it did not go well with the rhythm – he used a balalaika beat.
I could not stand it and went back to the Club main door. 
It was open.
At the end of the hall on both sides of portholes from the projectionist's, there were two doors. 
The left one stood wide open and it was where the guitar sounded from.

The grated window in a narrow room by was abutted by a level hospital couch with a beast-shaped soldier in a beakless aft cap, black overalls, and slippers. 
He had a guitar in his hands.
Another soldier, also in slippers, sat opposite him on a chair with its back against the wall. 
‘What the fuck you need here?’
‘It’s from ‘Shocking blue’ that you wanna play. I can show.’
They exchanged glances.
‘Well, show me.’

(... "beauty will save the world..."? 
Well, no one can know for certain.
It’s too painfully vague a thing – beauty.
Music is something more tangible.
It can do wonders and work miracles.
Create bridges.
Throw away all unnecessary.

Instead of a ‘pheasant' Zameshkevich, a ‘dipper' Rassolov, a ‘salaga' Ogoltsoff there remained just three young guys passing the guitar from hands to hands…) 

A couple of days later Sasha Roodko of Dnepropetrovsk knocked in the tin-covered door with his fingers eaten by plastering lime ‘dirt'. 
The Musician Alexander Roodko.
A bass guitarist.
In his civilian life, he worked at the regional Philharmonia.


That is how the creation of the VIA Orion started in our construction battalion based on the equipment and instruments left after the servicemen of the previous drafts.
The guys went to the Stuff barracks, they talked to the Zampolit of the VSO-11.
Sasha Roodko was appointed Director of the Club.
But he never got himself a ‘Pe-Sha’ outfit and he spent nights in the barracks of the Second Company and stood at the evening checks there.

He knew the musical notation.
He played on anything that would turn up.
He taught us the warming-up chant ‘mi-me-ma-mo-mu’ and he blinked, painfully and mutely, with his dull blue gaze at my crap at singing.
He had a big nose constantly swollen with rhinitis, and he burred.
But he was a Musician.

And I started to lead a double life.
After the working day and havvage at the Canteen, I was taking the left turn, to the Club...

‘May I join the ranks, Comrade Master Sergeant?’
‘Why late for the evening check, Ogoltsoff?’
‘I was at the Club.’
‘And what do you, Club-goers, exercise there?’
There sounded some giggling in the ranks supportive of the hint.
‘We exercise solfeggio there, Comrade Master Sergeant.’
The Commanders face stupidly stiffened.
He’d never heard such words in his life.
The giggling in the ranks increased but in the opposite direction.
‘The Battalion Zampolit is aware of it, Comrade Master Sergeant.’
‘Get to the ranks, suffle.. sulge... Son of a bitch!' 

And during the working day, I was as anyone else. 
We were transferred to the five-story building construction site in its concluding ante-delivery phase.
Vitya Novikov and Valik Nazarenko called me to an empty apartment.
We shared a bottle of wine from its neck.
A forgotten buzz.
Everything was gone before the evening check.
Yes, because what was there for three of us?


At the evening check, Captain Pissak sent the on-duty soldier to the Dishwashers' to fetch a washed-up cup for breath alcohol testing. 
As he moved along the rank, Pissak handed the cup to a soldier he cared to check with the order to exhale into it.
Two servicemen had already been ordered out of the ranks and face about.
When he handed the cup to me I realized that I was fucked because I was given out even before the test by the waves of heat and cold rolling in turn over me.
For the loosened belt on my outfit he ordered me five fatigues and now I was fucked completely.
Pissak sniffed from the cup and, sadistically looking aside, announced:
‘Well, I say, if a soldier hasn’t drunk you can see it at once.’

After the evening check, Vitya Strelyany told me with a smile: 
‘You were whiter than the fucking wall.’
As if I did not know that myself!
Pissak, bastard! What the fucking cat and mouse?

It’s hard to believe, but there came another day-off.
In the evening they showed a movie.
Some Polish film ‘The anatomy of love’ it was with certain hints at eroticism.
Maybe in Poland, there were more than just hints but until it got to us it had been shortened by repeated cut-outs. 
There was a whole pack with scissors, starting from the censorship down to acned projectionists snatching out whole pieces of film wherever there flashed bare tits in a frame.
For special friends and personal use.
Fucking morons.

The next morning in the line of leak-takers over the runnel in the sorteer I gave my dick the final shake and buttoning the fly up silently addressed it in my mind, amidst the general din:
‘That’s it, buddy. You’re just to be a drain cock for the two years.’

At work, we were removing construction debris and excess earth out of the basement with the stretchers. 
It’s called ‘to do planning’.
All of us kept sullen silence after that Polish film.
In a smoke break I, having nothing better to do, began to get at Alimosha.
He did not answer or briefly told me to fuck off and then suddenly jumped to his feet and pounced at me with his fists. 
I had to brush off as best I could.
Yet, to put it frankly, I’d never been proficient at the activity.

Then Prostomolotov dropped into the basement and shouted to stop and we again took up the stretchers.
I did a couple of walks and noticed that the pain in my right hand was not going to cease. 
My thumb was out of order after an awkward hit against the Alimosha’s Tatar-Mongolian mug.
 
The next morning the whole hand was swollen and after the Morning Dispensing the Assistant Paramedic from the Detachment Medical Unit (that same villager from our draft, but already in ‘Pe-Sha' outfit) took me to the Stavropol Military Hospital. 
We reached the city on some team-squad truck and there got on a bus because for soldiers city public transport was for free.
When we arrived at the hospital he told me to wait and entered some of the buildings.
The grounds looked quite attractive with a thick garden of yellow plum.
Yet I did not have the appetite for them because of the aching hand. 
Sitting on a bench near the building I fell asleep.

I opened my eyes to see a round muzzle with long cat-like mustaches right against my nose.
I started but the bench backrest safely kept me from falling. 
Another glance disclosed Captain’s shoulder straps on the cat.
Everything became clear – seeing a sleeping soldier on the bench he stooped for the alcohol breath test.

Then my escort came out and led me to another building for a check.
They twirled my thumb and I hissed like a gander and slapped my other hand, like a broken wing, against my side.
They diagnosed a bone fracture, bandaged the hand, plastered it with gypsum and left me in the hospital.
Thank you, Alimosha!
But washing the face with one hand turned out rather inconvenient.

What could be better than a fracture?
No jabs at all, just kick back and wait until the bone tissue grows over.
In the dining room, there were square tables for four persons and chairs – no benches. 
The havvage was much better than in our Canteen.
Quite understandable, though, because the hospital treated officers as well. 
Of course, all wore pajamas with no insignia only the wards for officers were on the second floor and for soldiers in the basement.
What’s the difference where to sleep?
Especially when the dining room was nearer to us – at the end of the corridor.

The hospital was far from being overcrowded.
In my ward, apart from me and a Georgian named Rezo, there were four vacant beds.
The Rezo's black hair was long enough to be combed back, obviously a ‘grandpa'. 
He held his left arm pressed tightly against his chest. 
The result of his work as a driver at the wheat harvesting.
In the field camp, he started fooling around with the cook and her husband stabbed him in the back with a large kitchen knife. 
The cook kept visiting him at the hospital.
They usually went into the thick garden and Rezo came back with yellow plums in the pocket of his pajamas jacket.
He offered them to me but I had no appetite.

The neighbor ward was full though.
One of the patients had been serving in our construction battalion.
He’s also a ‘grandpa’ but a Russian, named Sanya.
He had fair hair and his right brow was missing, licked off with a flat scar.
He was a driver too and went AWOL by his tractor and collided somewhere with something or, maybe, rolled over.
They had to amputate both his legs above the knees. 

He did not visit the dining room.
They guys from his ward were bringing the havvage directly to him, although he had crutches and a pair of high prostheses next to his bed.
On the front cover of ‘The Rural Life' magazine, he saw the picture of a shock worker of Communist labor from Stavropol against the background of her combine harvester and wheat ears and started writing letters to her. 
‘Hello, unknown Valentina...’

Sometimes his fellow drivers from our conbat visited him.
After their visits, he screamed songs and quarreled with the on-duty medical personnel. 
But he got off with it because he was to be exempted from the army anyway...

There was a library on the second floor.
Only by its name; two shelves filled with translations from Chinese about how socialism was being built in the Chinese village. 
The books were printed in the 50s’ before the exposure of the personality cult at the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU.
That is before Mao Tse-Tung took offense for disparaging his bosom friend Marshal Stalin and in both great powers they stopped singing: 

‘Moscow – Beijing,
Eternal friendship...’

And what would you do when left with no choice?
You go and read social realism masterpieces in the best tradition of the newspaper ‘Renmin Ribao’.

A commotion broke up in the next ward splashing out into the corridor – the combine driver Valentina answered Sanya’s letters with her live visit.
She got seated in the yard, on a bench under a tree.
A swarthy faced woman of Moldavian type, beautiful as movie stars from the first Soviet color movies about collective farms in the Cossack villages.
The most handsome guy from the neighbor ward alighted by her side with explanations that Sanya would presently come from a procedure. 

And Sanya, in hysterical jitters was fastening his prostheses sitting on his bed in the ward.
They helped to pull his pajamas pants over and sticking two crutches under his armpits he clumsily dragged his body to the exit.
But Valentina—well done!—for whole three minutes she sat next to him on the bench nearest to the entrance. 
Then the same handsome guy led her along the shortcut path to the unofficial exit through a hole in the fence... 

Two days later along the same path…
I looked and I couldn’t get it…
It just couldn’t be!
But who else is that if not Olga?!
Yes, it’s her!

The same evening I went with her to the park in her trousers and some kind of a turtleneck.
And she, of course, had a mini skirt on.
At the Dance Floor, a pack of local yobbos started to close in, probably,  attracted by the big yellow flowers pattern in my borrowed pants. 
Two ‘dippers’ on AWOL from our conbat had identified me and approached.
One was in the civilian and the second in a ‘Pe-Sha’ outfit.
I didn’t even know their names.
The locals got it that the construction battalion was having a pleasure-walk and dissolved. 

Olga had a heap of news in her life.
She again had moved to Theodosia and in the day nursery, there were no places for babies. 
She took Lenochka and went to the city executive committee on the chairman's reception day. 
He repeated the same thing – there were no places and that’s it.
Then she just put Lenochka on his desk and left.
He ran after her to the stairs,
‘Citizen! Take your baby!’
In short, they found a place.
Her mother was looking after Lenochka while she went to Stavropol, only in the train they stole all her money.
And my engagement ring was also gone.
But it had happened still in Konotop.
She was wearing it on her finger though it was too wide and doing washing she did not notice that it slipped off into the basin and she splashed it away with the soapy water into the drain pit.

The next day she borrowed money for traveling back from the cook who was just visiting Rezo and walked away down the same shortcut path.
They took the plaster off my hand and I was discharged...

I went to the south-eastern outskirt of Stavropol and from ring road there walked under the tall trees bordering the highway to Elista towards the Demino fork. 
Bright yellow leaves lay here and there on the roadside.
The sun was shining but it felt like it was autumn.
But when was the summer?

One of the conbat trucks pulled up on the highway.
The driver shouted to me:
‘Home?’
I said yes, home, and jumped into the truck back. 
Because neither from work nor from AWOLs we never returned ‘to the Detachment', or ‘to the barracks'. 
We returned home.

At home, it wasn't without news too. 
During my absence, our squad survived the rampage of hazing in the hands of ‘grandpas'. 
After the lights out they were taken out to the drill ground and made walk ‘goose step’ in a circle.
And they had been beaten not once.
Karlookha from the Second Company was particularly atrocious – he jabbed a ‘young’ with a knife not to stab, but prick.
And he himself was just a dwarf, half a head lower than normal growth.
Then in the basement of the 50-apartment block, he rush with his knife on Sehrguey Chernenko, aka Gray, from Dnepropetrovsk. 
But Gray had his Zone skills for such incidents and knocked him out.

Karlookha thief-swaggered only on the grounds of being a ‘grandpa' but the ‘grandpas' from his draft who had done their time before the army hadn't supported him against Gray. 
So everything, like, subsided but the tension remained.

On the wave of that tension, some ‘pheasant' clung to me, 
‘Are you from thieves?’
Saying ‘yes' to that question you had to answer for your words but for me, the articles of the Criminal Code were as closed a book as the formulas from Organic Chemistry. 
I said ‘no' and he took me to the Leninist room and began to shear my hair in ‘like-a-zero' style with a hand-held machine – the hair length was too arrogant for a ‘young'. 
I did not mind, it had two years ahead to grow back.
Only the machine was blunt and a couple of times pulled very painfully.

There was a plasterer from the Third Company in the Leninist Room who came to see his fellow-countrymen – Armenians.
And he suggested the ‘pheasant’ to let him finish my haircut.
The ‘pheasant’ himself was not happy already that he started that job and yielded the machine to him.
In short, Robert Zakarian did my haircut and when the machine jammed he said ‘I am sorry’.
I had already forgotten that such words existed.

Later he started visiting the Club and became a vocalist of the Orion.
He had the purest Russian pronunciation because he grew up in the north.
His father was convicted of dissidence or something of the sort and put to a camp in the north.
Then he was paroled to ‘chemistry' in the same north and Robert's mother moved there too with Robert and his younger brother. 
With his stretch completed, Robert’s father applied for emigration of his family from the Soviet Union.
Two years passed and he died before the permission was given.
There was some time before the fixed date of their departure and Robert went to have a rest in the seaside city of Sochi. 
There he met a girl Valya from the Tula city and fell in love.
They exchanged their addresses and when Robert returned to the north he announced that he would not go anywhere from the Soviet Union.

But the papers had been already drawn up for the whole family and if he refused his mother and brother would not be let out too.
The brother tried to make him understand the situation by fighting him, yet Robert remained uncompromising.
Then the mother began to regularly cry and he went with them to Paris to their relatives because of whose invitation they were let out.
In Paris, he found a job at a construction site.
He did not know the language, he had no friends and all his dreams were only of Valya from Tula.

A year later, with a tourist group from France, Robert Zakarian came to Moscow and on the very first evening he fled from his group in a hotel and scurried to Tula.
For ten days he lived there in the house of Valya's parents and then her mother persuaded him to give himself up to the authorities. 
They were simply delighted when he turned up in the Tula KGB because their bosses in Moscow were on the horn about the disappearance of a tourist from Paris. 
He was immediately taken to the airport and deported to France.

In Paris, he appealed to the Soviet Embassy requesting to let him back to the USSR to his beloved. 
Then he visited it each week and the embassy worker with a tattoo ‘Tolik' on his hand was shaking his head and announcing there was no answer to the application. 
Only a year later Tolik said that he had got a positive response.
Robert came to Tula, married Valya, they had a baby daughter and he got drafted to our construction battalion.

He liked to show a black and white photograph of his family: he himself on the left, black-haired with a serious look of wide-set eyes under the broad black eyebrows of a definitely family man; his wife Valya on the right in a white blouse and with a round face framed by fair hair; the baby-daughter in between them two in a cap of fine lace.
So the contingent of our construction battalion comprised not only cripples and jail-birds, we even had a double migrant.

On the Seventh of November, the Orion performed their first concert on the Club stage. 

The drums were knocked and kicked at by Vladimir Karpeshin, aka Karpesha.
Vladimir Rassolov and Robert Zakarian provided lead vocals.
Sasha Roodko sang along with them and played the bass guitar; I kept silent and played the rhythm guitar.

In our vocal-instrumental ensemble, there also was a horn player, Kolya Komissarenko, aka Commissar, a short, dark-haired guy from Dnepropetrovsk of a cheerfully Jewish appearance. 
He played diligently but did no better than I in singing.
Roodko was suffering but endured.
Perhaps, the presence of a horn player on stage tickled his nostalgia for his Philharmonic past. 
To hear less clam, he kept cutting the horn part shorter and shorter.

For the concert, we changed into parade-crap (three of us into that from strangers because the parade-crap was given after one year of service). 

The concert began with ‘The Wide, Wide Field’ song (sort of a patriotic one).
Roodko dreamed of making it with a vocal layout like that of the Pesnyary, but because of the limited range of the vocalists’ sound and the crappy clams from the Commissar's horn (at which he himself goggled his eyes out in sheer astonishment but still blew on) this philharmonic piece of shit was almost booed at.

However, Robert got a warm applaud for his number (sort of a lyrical one).
He performed the adaptation of the French song the air of which was year after year used by the Central Television News Program ‘Time' when announcing the weather forecast for the next day. 

‘Yes I can forgive you all
And let to the sky like a bird free of thrall...’

The servicemen of the Caucasian nationalities (mostly from the Separate Company) enthusiastically met the song ‘Eminnah’ performed by Vladimir Rassolov (sort of an Eastern-comical one).

‘Under the burka of your girlfriend
There's no girlfriend but your Grandpa. 
Uh, Eminnah!..’

And the song ‘Rain’ from the repertoire of Fofik (the Orpheuses at DK KEMZ, Konotop) was awarded a unanimous ovation (sort of a hit of the season).

However, in the oral review by Zampolit, aka the political deputy Commander of VSO-11, expressed after the concert in the close circle of musicians the final song received the lowest rating.
‘Roodko those ‘Rains’ of yours have already soaked everyone fucking through and through.’
He made a sugary-nasal voice meaning everyday pop stars:
‘Rains again… but you wait for me… no, I won’t wait… fuck off, you stupid ass-hole...’
We involuntary laughed.
That particular song had been heard by him for the first time but he accurately grasped the essence of the lyrics in the musical mass production of the kind.

‘I’ll pass through any rains
Because I’m loving you! Uh-uh!..’

And again the Commander of our team-squad was replaced.
Prostomolotov was returned to his previous squad without demotion from the lance-corporal rank though because he wasn’t caught at anything.
His clash with the ensign, the platoon commander, became the reason for the shuffle.
Most likely at some point, he incautiously did not care to hide his intellectual superiority over the ensign. 
‘Thief-swaggering’ was the conbat term to denote a behavior of the sort.

In his place came Alik Aliyev, an Azerbaijanian in a pheasantly tight outfit. 
He was a slim tall guy with a beautiful round face in which a clean thin skin tightly fitted his high cheekbones and the well-developed jaw. 
A week later he was given the rank of lance-corporal.
For that ceremonial occasion, he ordered our squad-team to fall in and delightedly announced, 
‘I would-a fuckan!’

But he somewhat hurry-scurried in his predictions and joyful anticipations.
There were no less tall but more emotionally reserved privates in our squad who quietly shared with Alik their concepts (which he understood and accepted) that if people who got to the construction battalion after doing their times in Zone still did not thief-swagger, then for him, who was honored to become a conbatist because of insufficient fluency in Russian, moderation was the correct course to survival. 
And on my personal behalf, he never meant to be mean. 
While still a private soldier, he accidentally became a witness of the case when in the Leninist Room of our Company two senior servicemen from the Orion interpreted to Prostomolotov, the then Commander of my squad-team, the postulate of the musicians being above the vanilla army relations as they determined in the Internal Service Regulations.
So we just did our job at work—digging, dragging, laying, hoisting—and after it, we got rest within the built-in limits of construction battalion life. 

Of course, we were not entitled to lie down on our beds in the koobriks before the lights-out (that was the privilege of ‘grandpas’) but then there were stools along the aisle and in the Leninist Room on which one could sit down and have a rest.
It was already too cold to go out into the gazebo by the entrance hall...

Then the winter began.
We were given hats and khaki pea jackets.
They pulled canvas tops over the truck backs by which we were taken to work and installed plank benches—from side to side—to ride sitting...

In the blue darkness of starting night our squad-team gathered after work at the foot of the nine-story building, but out truck was late.
We even walked a little to meet it on the other side of the forest belt remnants and then some hundred meters more to the empty of passers-by at such an hour sidewalk towards the distant blocks of five-story buildings.

We stood in a wide circle on the trampled snow.
Jokes, laughter, friendly jabs and claps on the shoulders – usual vivacity at the end of a usual working day before leaving for the usual havvage at the conbat Canteen. 

I was tired of listening for the hundredth time the jokes I’d heard before and walked to the light of a distant electric bulb on the end wall of the nine-story building.

(...one way to overcome the drag of time is to absorb space…)

So I plodded back, knowing that they would not leave without me as well as without the pair of ‘grandpa’-bricklayers that were changing their clothes in the nine-story building.
Boos, yells, and laughter of comrades remained behind. 
I walked in a measured step thinking of nothing.

(...such reflections are also named 'wistful soul yearnings', that is when you don't finalize your thoughts about anything specific, but still, for some reason, feel sad…) 

So I entered the remnants of the forest belt when a muffled call came from some sad and distant place.
Something called me.
I returned to here-and-now, reluctantly looked around and saw the rear side of the truck rolling on me.

I didn’t have time to jump aside only wanted to and bent my legs to push off the road.
I was saved by the tilting in the direction of the prepared jump – the impact of the rear side completed the started move and threw me under the tree and not onto the road under the rolling truck wheels.

‘We've been shouting to you so much,' said Vitya Strelyany, as we rode home. 
Well, I didn’t know.
I had heard just one call and from very far away.
My right shoulder hurt for two days. 

At the end of December, our squad-team was transferred to the multi-apartment building construction site. 
Or rather to initialization of that site.
There was just the pit for laying foundation blocks and there was a tower crane on a short ran of its tracks.
Yes, and there was a tin-roofed trailer with a door and two windows taken off its wheels and put by the pit.
We got a clear-cut task – to dig the trench for the side wall foundation blocks because the wall, as it turned out, should pass two meters closer to the trailer and not in the already excavated pit.
When digging out the foundation pit they did not take into account that the building would be sitting on the pipe providing running water for a whole city area.
Then they woke up and decided to move the building before it was started.
However, while they were figuring out this and that, winter came, frost struck and no machines were able to expand the foundation pit – the frozen ground was too hard for the excavator buckets and therefore they drove us to the rescue.

Half of the trailer was packed with new shovels and we even were given the unheard-of luxury – protective canvas mittens.
Of course, the ground was too hard and for the shovels too, breakers were the must.
And they were brought, a whole truckload of breakers, and dumped with a din by the trailer. 
Heavy, metal breakers, a meter and a half long, the only defect that they were self-made. 

At one of the local productions, they took thick rebar cut it into pieces of the needed length, hammered the ends in a smithy to make them pointed and dumped by the pit. 
However, the breaker should be smooth, that's a hand instrument. 
As for rebar, it is intended for making reinforced concrete and therefore covered with frequent oblique scars for firmer merging with the concrete. 
Those scars, though rounded, would tear any mittens after a dozen strikes with the rebar breaker against the ground and it would be rubbing the skin off even in the most calloused and hardened palms.

But if not we then who else would defend the homeland from plan making ass-holes?
Conbat will cover anything...

The wind, like a dog, broke off the chain, tumbled in helter-skelter around, snapped at the loosened ear-flaps of our hats and lashed with their strings at the face. 
Yet the main job of the wind was to drag along its current the tumbling black and gray clouds scudding as low as the cabin top of the tower crane.
Because of those clouds, all around was drowning in dusky twilight from morning to night. 
To get warm we had the trailer heated with our breath.
The mittens had long since got worn to tatters.
We grabbed the frosty rebars with found in the trailer rags.

A strike of the rebar against the ground clove off a clumsy piece of it the size of a walnut.
Then another splinter, then one more.
Your partner was standing with his back to the wind, waiting for you to knock enough to scrape them off and throw away with the shovel.
As Vitya Strelyany cared to put it:

‘We were brought to Stavropol
To dig and shovel the ground,
But it is so fucking hard, 
Harder can’t be found.’
 
(...but I entertain an unshared suspicion that it was an adaptation of a Zone stanza from the first five-year plans era turned up in the mines of Donbass...)

However, there’s a nook to be happy too – oh, how sweet is dozing when you sit on the floor in the trailer leaning your back against the backs of your comrades!

After half a day of breaking-scraping, we discovered that at the depth of half a meter plus the permafrost transformed into the ground almost as hard but yielding to the bayonet shovel. 
Three days later we developed the trench digging methodology.
If you dig a meter by meter hole two meters deep and next to it another such a hole then the two can be connected with a tunnel bridged over with the layer of frozen ground. 
The bridge is noosed with the crane slings and you will hollow out the edges of the permafrost bridge until the moment when the crane power is enough to tear off and hoist a whole block of the frozen ground. 
Aha! Fucking bitch!

Yes, the construction battalion did it!
And although there remained many days of breaking and scraping to the very end of the trench the victory was ours.
We broke the backbone of the polar night twilight that had descended as far as the city of Stavropol.

Besides the trailer, you also could shelter from the frost in the entrances to staircases of the multi-apartment block on the other side of the pit.
When not standing in the piercing wind, a cigarette could also warm you up when a passer-by in a staircase would give you one.

While I was basking in the building entrances Alimosha and Novikov explored the surrounding lands and discovered a dairy factory and a bakery plant as well. 
Just a question of climbing a pair of fencing walls.
They returned swollen like balloons with the milk cardboard pyramids of half a liter and loaves of hot bread tucked under their pea jackets.
Since that day we were sending foragers there.
The workers of both enterprises allowed you to loot directly from the production lines.

Sometimes we went out on the streets to ask money from the passers-by.
‘Bro, 27 kopecks not enough for a bottle, can you help out?' 
‘Sister, 11 kopecks for a pack of ‘Belomor’, eh?
Two days without a smoke..’

Alimosha explained the nuances to me.
Never address the pensioner oldies – no go, and they might even start to yell.
Asking for a round sum was also a mistake; instead of 27 he would give you at least 30, and instead of 11 you’d get 15 kopecks.
What the money for?
Well, instead of 9 kopeck shag or ‘Pamir’ for 11 kopecks you could buy Cuban ‘Partogas’, aka ‘the thermonuclear’, or that same ‘Prima’ again; but not Indian ‘Red and White’ – sour crap in golden candy wrappers.
And at times we drink wine too.
To drive away fatigue, to wash down the snack from the bakery plant.

Oh, how low I fell!
Begging on the streets!
And could I not die of shame?

(...well, firstly, we had a more precise term for that activity: not begging, but ‘jackalling’
And as for the shame, I’m probably a pervert.
I am more ashamed before Valya Pisanka for that paper tophat than for the coppers received in my palm from the passers-by.
If even I, at certain points, might be a noble man, but, on the whole, not a Spanish grandee – that’s for sure…)

In February the bread-and-butter carnival was over; we were transferred to the construction of the Medical Center. 
There the basement was already bridged over with concrete slabs of floors, but not completely.
Under the floor, we were building a fire of the planks we broke with breakers because there was no trailer. 
The grounds of the future Medical Center was really vast but on the outskirts with no hunting grounds for the jackalling.

The trucks for our transportation to work and back provided a local motor depot with civilian drivers.
Ours was a hairy asshole.
He flew into the grounds of the Center on his UAZ, beat on the breaks and the truck glided along the icing, turned around and stopped – get in, off we go!
During the trick, the tattered, not fully fixed canvas top quacked and bubbled like a parachute in arms of a landed saboteur. 
The driver grinned his bad-teeth smile from under his thin mustache – he was in high spirits from that sort of gypsy romanticism. 
The exhaust pipe of his truck could give out loud bangs but he withheld the fun for the passage along the city sidewalks – to rough the passers-by.
Bang!!
‘Oy, Mommy!’
The buddies explained something about those claps and the carburetor, but such things always were above my head.

On one of the first days in the new place, I went to the wooden toilet on the edge of the grounds.
When urged to take a leak we loosened bowls at any near nook so I would go that far for that.
It’s only that because of the frost using of the sorteer at the Detachment had certain risks to it.
The whole floor there became one solid yellow skating rink, the boots slid on the smooth ice and slid apart when squatting over an ochco. 
While I emptied the intestines at that faraway toilet I became aware of some strange auditory sensations. 
I kind of heard… well, not quite voices… rather, echoes of voices. 
A distant, cohesive rumble of voices, without any distinguishable words, but some low even hum without splashes.

Then I took a letter from the inside pocket of my jacket.
I never re-read them but kept on me.
Without looking who the letter was from I used it like toilet paper. 
I stood up, buttoned my pants and suddenly saw the source of the rumble.
The plank walls and partitions of the toilet were thickly covered with inscriptions. 
Names, dates, settlement names were written and scratched with pencils and pens.
Some climbed on top of others, there was not enough spare space.
I realized that earlier it used to be the grounds of the Stavropol Collection and Distribution Point of Draftees who, already immersed into the two-year-long eternity, already swept by it, were leaving their own here,
‘Sakha, village...’
‘Athos, settlement...’
‘Drun, city...’
They were already there—were engulfed—because their voices were not make-out-able, just some wordless hum, but the hands were still finishing the parting marks. 
‘Andron...’

(...in the construction battalion, the universal urge to leave a meme of oneself does not disappear, but becomes anonymous.
You would not see there the classic ‘Vasya was here’, they used a mutual mark for everybody:
‘Orel, DMB-73’.
Read it as ‘Drafted from the Orel-City (or region) demobilized in 1973’.
With graphite, chalk, paint on walls, on pipes, on the tin. 
In every construction site or building erected by the Stavropol Construction Battalion about a year or two before 1973, there was such a mark. 
Then there came ‘Tula, DMB-74’.
The time would come for ‘Sumy, DMB-75', and ‘Dnepr, DMB-75' but it still was so far away…) 

The Orion took part in the city music contest.
We performed two numbers but was not awarded any place.
In general, the whole affair seemed started for the sake of a local singer.
A young guy could sing without a microphone filling the whole audience with his voice.
That’s some singer!
I never heard him later on TV or over the radio, they had no vacancies there; muslim magomaevs and iosif kobsons kept their jobs for decades. 

The second of our numbers was ‘The Indian’s Song’ from the repertoire of Tom Jones.
No one knew what about he sang in it, but in the Soviet adaptation the song bemoaned the bitter fate of American Redskins: 

‘From reservation, know it, brother,
There's one way to hell and no other...’

At that contest, the 'brass' group in our band already had two horn players. 
Ensign Jafar Jafarov had been transferred to our conbat from I can't say where for I didn’t care what.
He came to the Club and announced that he was playing a horn.
His eastern appearance gave a pleasant impression of softness. 
A rounded face with the soft swarthy skin, the soft glinting of his black olive-like eyes, his soft smile when uttering, ‘I swear to you by my Mom!' 
And he really played the horn which he was bringing with him and carrying away in its case.
Kolya Commissar started to blow his one much better with Jafar around. 

Gray, the tamer of Karlookha, became a frequent visitor to the Club too, not as a musician though just because of it was a secluded spot in the conbat life.

At work, he fucked it at the very beginning of his service and was just doing two-year-long time at the construction battalion. 
And what fucking difference from the penitentiary colony?
A bit softer conditions and spetzovka in khaki color.

Arriving in the morning on the site, we went to the city and returned only for the evening truck home.
At times he was locked up in the clink but even the Battalion Commander regardless of his chronic brain marasmus had realised the futility of that educational measures towards the fully-developed stiff-lipped jail-bird with the bald patch of a scar on his eyebrow in the sharp face of the head stuck forward on the drooping neck from his broad shoulders. 
Gray walked through life along the unpretentious well-defined path of a hereditary thief.
 
In the Club, he shared stories of his recent adventures in the city or roughed Commissar. 
That was not right because both Commissar and he were from the same draft but for Gray, the Zone Code overweighted that of the construction battalion. 
On the eve of becoming a ‘pheasant' Commissar made a gaudy tattoo on the entire rear of his right hand – a ridge of mountains and the sun peeping from behind them with sharp spikes of rays and the bold inscription underneath to support that fresh shining world: ‘The North Caucasus'. 
When on the stage, he took such a position that the tattoo would face the audience and, blowing his horn aloft, he squinted proudly at the sprawling masterpiece of an unknown author. 

Probably, it went against Gray's grains that Commissar was swaggering with more ostentatious tattoo than his spider-cross (a Zona sign for the initiated) hardly bigger than a ping-pong ball, and Gray picked at the cheerful horn blower. 

(...however, when I use the word ‘probably' you don't have to take all that follows for its face value because of there certainly might be other assumptions besides it. 
There can be a whole lot of variants and interpretations but that ‘probably' sweeps them all aside and leaves just one, maybe not the truest to life. 

Word requires cautious treatment. 
At times you blurt something out, like, say  ‘laboohs (aka musicians) – are one family! We support each other like a wall!’ and run into nagging qualms: oops! I did it again…
Because of that over-generalizing words are good for slogans only, like:
‘Workers of all the countries – unite!’
Or else:
‘Bipeds! Love each other!’

They work only until the common interests coincide with the interests of the given, individually taken mammal but whenever the interests diverge then at once – you to yourselves, and we will go our way…) 

Let’s take the same Yura Zameshkevich.
After locking up the stoke-house he came to the Club.
There he wouldn't anger the eyes of the Fathers Commanders and could strum a guitar, serenely drink a mug of chifir (a pack of tea for 250 ml of water and bring to boiling) taken from the Canteen kitchen, and he's – one of us. 
A person of a subtle soul constitution, an exquisite connoisseur of real music, a loyal friend, a reliable comrade, and brother – a labooh, in a word.

But then his wife arrived to visit him and waited at the checkpoint house while he raced around looking for a parade crap and a greatcoat to go with her to the city.
He shaved hastily and got the Leave Ticket at the Staff barracks and dropped in for some reason to the Club where I was sitting on a back row seat.
He briskly jumped in and out of the musicians' and leaving the Club grabbed my completely unaware dick and all in his bearish grip and raised me in the air for goodbye. 
Of course, I screamed!
Then the pain passed but there remained an inescapable bewilderment.
What for?

(...I haven't found the answer either in writings of the naive primitivist Freud and his brother-scholars, not in all the Upanishads and Bhagavatas, nor in the two of Covenants, nor in the Quran. 
Only in ‘The History of Russia from Ancient Times’ some passage mentioned the case of a False Dmitry hiding at the back of the palace where a Cossack found him and dragged to the raging mob by grabbing his ‘secret knot’.
But there might be traced some purpose for the deed in contrast to Yura's…
What was it to him?. 

Certain questions are beyond the power of human comprehension; we only can point at them for the edification of the inquisitive and spread our hands wide out – this is out of reach for the human mind.

They have even invented a special scientific term for such cases.
When, say, you are so cool that taking a leak you let out a squirt that easily bores through the three-meter-thick layer of ice but then you come across some crap that even you don’t fucking know what the fuck it can be at all.
And that means you've run into that scientific thing, named transcendentalism…)

So what else did we do in the Club in addition to solfeggio, rehearsals and wistful contemplating of transcendental questions from all their sides?
Fooling around with the casually flashed chifir?
Its bitterness was a rare delicacy.
And vodka hardly happened oftener...

We used a code-knock at the door of the musicians' to be let in. 
With the right knock, the door would open but if not then go where you had come from, or shout through the closed door what was your fucking message. 

One time after the right code and click of opening lock the doorway filled the figure of Zampolit with an ensign from the Fourth Company behind who had knocked the code, the fucking excursion guide. 
Our cook-vocalist Volodya Rassolov, aka Pickle, was fast and up to the situation: while the two officers gaped around what’s what he glibly slipped the bottle into a boot top in the pair of them standing by his side.
Of course, Zampolit still called us a gang of drunkards and parasites but there had been no direct evidence already...

Yet most of all we talked: who was what in the civilian life, what would he do after the demobilization and that Third Company went to kick the shit out of Separate Company but the black-ass fuckers fought the assault back with their belt plates and the pigsty soldier-oversee could really be fucking his swine harem...
The champion of talking was, surely, Karpesha.
In his quiet confidential tone of voice, he would for hours spin a yarn about his ten-day furlough when six times broke up and reconciled with a girl he met, his former classmate...

Got bored with listening to the same minutiae for the seventh time?
Go out into the empty cinema hall, get seated next to Robert in the last row of seats and he would tell you about Parisian life.
In Paris, everyone knows everything about everybody else. 
For example, that Jean Marais was a gay.
And that’s a pity, of course.
Although I did not like him starring in ‘Fantômas', but as D'Artagnan in ‘The Iron Mask', he was the masculinity itself. 
That’s what that fucking Paris was doing of men...

Gray would share how he used to rough those in love passing along his street.
Going out of the wicket he'd cock up the trigger of his dad's shotgun and ask: 
‘Well, well, having a walk, Romeo?’
Neglecting the possibility of a friendly conversation, the guy would sprint away, but in fucking zigzags, sort of, issuing instructive shrieks, on the run, over his shoulder:
‘Run! Sveta, run!’evening heck
Or how he battered his wife for the first time and the following morning she had Chink eyes...

And Jafarov, thoughtfully stroking the soft gleam of his horn, would narrate that still but a kid he, at a ‘trash doing' peeped through the key-hole to watch a whore at a blowjob for an officer and after that she returned to the hall and danced with someone else and suck kissed another officer of a higher rank than the previous one.
‘But such a beautiful woman! Upon my word of honor! Fuck it!’

And when he served in the orchestra, their leader walked around the city with a tube.
The biggest trumpet in brass bands.
Hunting for ‘trash’, yes.
He was walking and looking out where they carried funeral wreaths for him to follow.
‘Would you like a military band at the funeral?
Let’s talk terms.’
I swear to you, such a wheeler-dealer. 
But not with the whole of the orchestra, sure thing.
That kind of ‘trash’ is called ‘to play a sleeper’.
Yes.
One time, as usual, we went ‘to play a sleeper'. 
On the second floor, the door to the landing wide open, we came in.
In the first room, the relatives sat around, crying. 
Everything in a proper way.
Only that they’re somehow too much at crying.
And with zero of notice towards the musicians.
The leader came up to the one he had made the deal with,
‘What’s the fuss?’
‘Oh, we’re so distressed! It’s a disaster. We may have to cancel the funeral.’
And she showed us to the neighbor room.
That one also full of relatives a-crying, but even louder than in the first room. 

In the room center, there's a table with a coffin on it. 
Everything in a proper way.
And in the coffin, the dead man a-sitting. 
Well, upon my word, just sitting upright.
He, when alive, was a hunchback.
Such a big hump, they couldn't make him lie down.
As a result, our ‘playing the sleeper’ got fucked...

The leader came nearer and pressed at the sleeper’s forehead.
It went over its hump and lay down in a proper way. 
Only now the legs got sticking up in the air.
No way to shut the lid...
‘We've already tried that way!' said she who he had made the deal with and wailed loudest in the room. 
But the leader was a real smartie, yes!
‘Okay,’ said he. ‘I want all out of the room but the musicians.’

In general, we pulled the deceased out of the coffin, put down with its forehead to the floor, hoisted the coffin over it and – Bang!
Who would like to lose a ‘trash’?

‘It.. helped?’asked I through tears.
Something cracked, but—I swear!—it straightened out.
We put the coffin back on the table and shoved the sleeper in.
All in a proper way.
Only that... 
‘??' (I no longer had any strength for asking.) 
It grew ten centimeters taller and its feet stuck out from the too fucking short coffin…

In the tall story of the labooh about the hunchback, sleeper reality merged with fiction.
I was letting out my last breath sprawling in a plywood seat of the cinema hall, chocked with laughter.
And I had no idea that in Stavropol there was the Regional Committee of the CPSU with the Secretary of the Committee, certain Gorbachov, aka Hunchy, but among the local ‘workshoppers’ they handled him ‘the Envelope’.

(…‘workshoppers’ were the people who wanted to do business under the realities of developed socialism, which wish they had to pay for.
Gorbachov trained the Stavropol workshoppers to bring the payment to him exclusively in envelopes, as it was the practice in the whole civilized world…)

I don’t want you to get the impression that the construction battalion was a hopeless dreary hard labor and nothing else.
Sometimes there too came the spring and we switched to the summer dress uniform.
We handed our long-sleeved undershirts and pea jackets in, to the company master sergeant, because the winter outfit for some reason had become so too heavy. 
We changed warm gray hats of artificial fur for dandyish aft caps.
It’s so nice to stand in the light-dressed ranks at the Morning Dispensing under a fresh blue sky with thin cloud feathers; to ride in the open back of a truck into the city filled with the morning sun where so many colorful dresses and skirts were walking the sidewalks.

In spring the population of girls grew drastically and they began to spill over and out of the sidewalks...
In any case, at the end of the working day, two girls appeared even in the territory of the future Medical Center. 
I was nearing the place where the truck would pick us up and those two girls walked in the same direction some thirty meters ahead of me.
Probably, they were taking a shortcut somewhere and paced in no hurry, talking to each other.
Suddenly their conversation broke off.
Bypassing our truck arrival point they accelerated to quick strides and disappeared from view.
And at the spot was already sitting Sasha Khvorostyuk – the first to come.

He had got perched on a half-meter stump with his hands resting on the knees widely apart, like, in the KGC position—King of Gay Cocks—and, happy with himself, turned his beak from side to side.
From his unbuttoned fly, his cock was hanging languidly. 
That's why the girls trotted away and they would hardly shortcut here anymore. 
Because of that fucked in the head platypus!

And sometimes in the construction battalion, you suddenly submerged into another world – away from trenches, shovels, pallets, roughing… 

Everything went on as always, but on entering the city our truck took to an unfamiliar route.
Probably, our lance-corporal Alik knew where we were going, but his lexicon limitations did not allow him to talk of anything beyond the usual commands and responses so he kept silent and importantly puffed looks.

The truck stopped near the city circus building.
We jumped off after Alik and a man in the civilian explained what we had to do.

There was a change in the circus – one troupe was leaving and replaced with the touring circus of Lilliputians.

(..what is the role of the construction battalion in the interval between two circuses? 
Exactly!
To load one and unload the other…)

But still it was a holiday and we festively dragged large boxes into long trailer vans with canvas top and festively pulled the same boxes out of the same, but already other, long trailer vans.
And then we ate ice-cream, drank kvass from the wheeled barrel in the circus square, entered the building and got seated wherever one chose, on the velvet crimson seats in the empty amphitheater around the arena.

The artists from the newly arrived Lilliputians troupe walked admired circles around the shortest serviceman in our special mission docker group.
If he had grown two centimeters shorter they would not press him in the army, not even to a construction battalion, but now: taller than a meter and fifty-six?
Wow! A ready-made non-combatant!
One of the Lilliputians even spoke to him in an undertone; the soldier never confessed of what.
Most likely, it was an invitation to enter the number of power acrobats, when a whole pyramid of light-weight Lilliputians was built upon the propping shoulders of one strongman...

Some Lilliputian woman asked me for help.
We left the building through a side passage and she led me to a row of house trailers.

(...it’s somehow strange to follow a woman not taller than your waist, it feels like being an elephant in a small Indian village…)

She climbed onto the high porch, threw her arm up above her head and pulled the handle of the unyielding door.
Then in a thin voice, she asked me to open it. 
I lowered my hand on the handle which readily turned down and pulled the door.
‘Thank you!' said a voice of the highest pitched flute. 
‘You’re welcome.’
It’s so inconvenient to live in a world not made to fit you...

I returned to the circus where Alik Aliev was racing along the arena circling after a white pony who openly resented flirtations from any stray corporals in kirza boots.
The wind instruments hurriedly rehearsed bravura marches in their pit above the curtained arena entrance, with a light streak of impudent out-of-keyism usual at circus orchestras.

A group of Lilliputians gathered by the heavy folds of the arena entrance curtains following as one of them, the size of a kindergarten kid, was raising the hell of a scandal at her husband whom she caught in a trailer with another Lilliputian woman. 
When performed in a chicken squeaks, foul language loses its specific weightiness, but the intensity of the infuriated wife’s emotions was on a par with the deepest Shakespearean passions...

Olga arrived in the middle of the day.
We were brought to the midday meal and they told me:
‘Your wife waits at the checkpoint house.’
I raced there, then to the Staff barracks.
They gave me a Leave Ticket only until the morning.
The Battalion Commander was not there, said they, the Ticket would be prolonged next day after the Morning Dispensing, said they.
Then I barely found some parade crap, the master sergeant was not there together with the storeroom key. 
But if in a canvas outfit, the military patrols in the city would rake you in whether you had the Ticket or not.
So we got to the city only in the evening but she had already had a room in the hotel.

One-person room with a washbasin on the wall.
Then some red-haired guy knocked at the door.
Olga said, meet please, we arrived by the same train together. 
The fellow traveler invited us to his room where he had a meeting with friends.
We went there only Olga asked me to say that she was my sister – when on the train she jazzed him that she was visiting her brother.

(...well, okay, then…
Sarah and Abraham had also been there...)

He had a long table in his room all filled with wine bottles, sort of a hussar banquet.
Sometime earlier he had been a cadet at the Stavropol Military Aviation School but got expelled and now came there to see his friends.
And those were already third-year cadets...

I knew their Aviation School, out squad-team once was laying partitions in the basement of some building there.
When the bell sounded and the cadets rushed to the classes from the yard, we combed trash pits in the gazebos hunting cigarette butts...

Now they were sharing common memories to each other, toasting this and that.
We also drank.
Then I saw how that red-haired dropped his palm on Olga’s knee.
What to do? Smash a bottle on his head?
Not quite a right thing for a girl's brother to shoo off his prospective brother-in-law. 
Of course, she took his hand off and I, like, hadn't seen anything. 
We left.

She said and so what of it?
And indeed, in Konotop on the Peace Square when our whole passe sat on a bench by the fountain to have a smoke they also stroked her knees and she brushed their hand off that as casually. 
Yet we hadn’t been married then...

In the morning when I ran to the UAZ taking ensigns to the detachment, Jafarov rocked with laughter in its open back.
‘You ran as if in a slow-motion film stretch. Clearly doing your best, but still no progress. I swear by Mommy.
Good luck there was no counter wind.’

I was given a Leave Ticket until the evening check.
Dirty fuckers.

When I returned Olga was still sleeping in her blouse inside out.
Then it was the time to check out, the room was given for one day.

I told her I should be at the Company for the evening check and she said her train was also in the evening.
We went to the cinema; some kind of a fairy tale about a Persian Hercules named Rostam. 
Then we were sitting on a bench at the bottom of Komsomol Gorka hill.
She said that she had to go to the train but no need to see her off.
She cried.

The passers-by giggled on the sly – a classic picture by Repin: the girl got pregnant but the soldier doesn't care a fuck. 

She left.
I sat on a little more and went home...

The next day in the Canteen I knocked toppled a bowl of soup from the table.
It spilled in my lap, scolding hot even through the canvas pants.
I could not get it how it had happened.
Everyone at the table looked up at me, strangely silent, and no one laughed.
Spilled the soup in the lap.
What sign could it be? 
The blouse inside out.
Why?.

(...certain thoughts are better to be left alone and not thought at all but if you have still happened to start, they're better to be dropped and not thought all the way down their consequential road to the very end...) 

Zampolit ordered Sasha Roodko to have a brass band for the Victory Day, on May 9, or he'd be kicked out to a construction site as a plasterer’s hand and his Company's master sergeant would rot him ‘on the floors’ till the demobilization.
We did not want to let down the leader of the Orion and – here you are!
In three weeks we threw together a brass band. 

Jafarov and Commissar, clear enough, two horn players, Pickle played the baritone, Zameshkevich blew the tuba.
It turned out in their schooldays they participated in a brass music courses.
Karpesha was the drummer, Roodko played the clarinet, the Club painter beat the big drum and mine was the main instrument in any brass band – two copper plates.
Bzdents!!

Sasha Lopatko began his service in the same squad-team with me but then his Dad came and held negotiations in the Staff barracks… 
His Dad was, by the way, a priest.
Probably, for that reason, Sasha got to the construction battalion. 
Not anyone, after all, could be trusted with handling military weapons.

We prepared two numbers: “On the Hills of Manchuria” and “Farewell of the Slav Woman” not because we were frightened by Zampolit’s threat but simply a labooh would do what he could for a labooh.
On May 9 we changed into parade craps and were taken by the UAZ van to different construction sites escorted by the ‘goat’-Willis with Zampolit.
Holidays were for idlers and the construction battalion warriors had always been on duty.

The squad-teams working at the sites were ordered to briefly leave their front of work and fall in in front of their constructions.
Zampolit pushed over a very short speech (the marasmatic Battalion Commander would start an oration for half an hour without knowing what he was about at all), we played ‘The Hills’ and ‘The Slav’ and the sun playfully shined on the copper and brass.
To have a holiday you need a brass band...

The following step in the Orion’s career was the invitation to play dances in the club of the village of Demino located six kilometers further from our detachment along the same asphalt road.
The musicians not only played but, replacing each other at the instruments, climbed, in turn,  down from the small stage to the small hall to dance amidst the local youth. 
Of all the Orions the pleasure was withheld for the irreplaceable bass guitarist, Sasha Roodko.

Under the long song sung by Robert Zakarian, I was embracing the ample-bodied villager Irina. 
Life was smiling at me...

Before his demobilization Yura Zameshkevich informed Major Avetician, the Battalion Supply and Maintenance Commander, that no one but I was able to replace him at the position of the Battalion Stoker.
Zameshkevich's statement was actively backed by the Battalion Cook Vladimir Rassolov, aka Pickle, who had still to serve for another half a year. 
In course of the petition, the chef congratulated the Supply and Maintenance Commander on obtaining the long-awaited-for rank of Major.
As a result, Major Avetisian agreed to enroll me in the glorious ranks of the ‘chmo’.

The collective name of ‘chmo’ embraced all the servicemen engaged in the internal battalion services:
the pigman, dishwashers, stokers, cooks, the locksmith, the tailor, the shoemaker, the projectionist, drivers of the vehicles for the commanding officers, and even the assistant paramedic at the first aid unit – everybody who was not fortunate enough to work at construction sites was a part of ‘chmo' reporting to Major Avetisian. 

(...CHMO, in fact, was the acronym of ‘man messing around with the society' but it sounded so impressive that forced to forget the original meaning and nowadays everyone thinks that ‘chmo' is akin to ‘sucker' only more degrading…) 

Before his return to the civilian life, Yura Zameshkevich showed me the location of the water well with the water supply valves filling the water tank above the stoker-house.
He taught me to light the nozzle in the steam boiler furnace with a torch, to read the water measuring tube and the pressure gauge.
I was transferred to the Fourth Company where all the ‘chmo’ was listed and Yura got demobilized.

The ‘young' draft was from the Crimea and Major Avetisian chose me a partner from them – Vanya with a thin mustache and thick eyebrows. 
It's highly doubtful that Major Avetisian's choice of Vanya was prompted by the eyebrows thickness of the latter. 
Most likely, Vanya's father, who came to see his son on the third day of the service, found convincing arguments when negotiating with the Major. 
I shared Yura Zameshkevich’s lectures with Vanya and we began to work in two shifts.

The stoker-house of the Military Detachment 41769 consisted of two high halls in a brick one-story building. 
Each of the halls contained two massive boilers within their mutual brick lining and a stock of all kinds of pipes with valves and cocks – for hot water, for cold water, for steam, for fuel supply… 
In the concrete floor before each boiler was planted an air pump motor forcing the fuel to spray from the nozzle inside the respective furnace.
However, only one boiler was in permanent operation, the one in the further from the entrance hall, all the remaining were reserved or used for the heating in winter.

The stokers' task in summer was to provide steam for cooking boilers in the kitchen of the Canteen plus hot water for the Dishwashers'.   
And, once a month, we heated water for the bath of all the servicemen VSO-11 and Separate Company.
Anyway, each day you had to sit at a round table under the high window opposite the incessant howling of the air pump and the buzz of the nozzle flame in the boiler furnace for at least three or four hours until the on-duty cook knocked on the locked door of the stoker-house to say the havvage was ready. 
Then you could turn it off.
Silence is an invaluable grace.

To the right from the entrance door, there was a narrow room of the pumping section – to drive hot water through the heating system in winter. 
But going straight ahead, in the corner behind the twinned boilers of the first hall you’d find the door to a small workshop.
There was a window, a wooden workbench without a vice under the end wall across the room, an iron box in the corner between the door and the window containing a hammer and a blunt chisel, and a narrow piece of a mirror embedded in the plaster next to the switch of the electric bulb in the ceiling.

The arrival of the summer was marked by the chmo of the VSO-11 with a collective booze.
The battalion's truck delivering havvage to the watchmen at the construction sites and those kept there even at night by urgent works came back with a box of vodka smuggled into an emptied havvage thermos flask.
The on-duty officer at the checkpoint cast a fleeting glance into the back of the returning truck and it passed the gate.

The orgy started after the lights-out near the remote car-boxes.
I also was invited because a stoker is a handy accessory in the soldier life.

In the bright illumination from the full moon, some fifteen chmomen sat in a wide circle to the ground, like an aboriginal tribe of that field.
All were facing the center of the circle where the glass of vodka bottles and the sides of two pots with meat fried by cooks in large baking trays at the Canteen kitchen glistened in the moonlight. 
On the spread burlap of two empty sacks there piled several loaves of bread chopped in the Bread-Cutter’s.

Never before I had vodka drunk from the bottle neck.
The initial gulps were disgusting but the following kept pouring in smoothly.
The snack, regrettably, had got finished off all too soon.

I never finished the bottle in my hand.
Having risen on unsteady legs, with the best wishes to the honest company, I informed of immediate departure of me to the village of Demino.
‘All's nyshtyak, buddy-bros. What fucki' on-dut' what fucki' office..rr… It's me on-dut'… fuck!..' 

Nevertheless, not to run into, I crossed the perimeter fence near the pigsty, away from the barracks.
And I made for the round face of the full moon that shone from above distant Demino and was swaying back and forth like on a swing. 
I muttered reproaches to its treacherous inconstancy and to the field as well for arranging a sea-rolling in my way.
Then I fell down and tried to hoist me on my elbows but the earth gravity proved too powerful and the field was so irresistibly soft…

I woke up in the twilight of the dawn, only a hundred meters from the pigsty, dying from thirst, and went back to drink water from the tap in the stoker-house and to fall onto the workbench in the workshop room. 

I seemingly gave a too free rein to my wishful thinking when I imagined that until the end of my service I would live my life between the Club and the stoker-house. 
In the morning after one of the night shifts, Major Avetisian found me asleep in the workshop and ordered to go to the Company barrack.
And that at the time when many of the chmomen even skipped the evening check!
The soldier-clerk from the Stuff barracks slept at the Medical Unit as well as the paramedic assistant.
The Club painter Lopatko had a room of his own at the Club.
But a poor stoker, after a day of sitting in that howling hell of the stoker-house had to go for the evening check where to the calls for absent chmomen a voice from the ranks shouted ‘on duty!' and there were no questions at all... 

To somehow pass the time while they were cooking the havvage I took a book from the library in the Staff barracks with the assistance of the Staff clerk.
I chose it for its thickness so that it lasted longer.
‘The Idiot’ by Dostoevsky.
Wow! That’s the book!
A culmination upon culmination.
After his books prescribed by the school curriculum, I wouldn't have thought he had been writing so cool. 
And there wasn’t anything else to take from the Staff library with its just one shelf of books.
But reading the masterpieces of B. Polevoy and N. Ostrovsky after Dostoevsky’s book was not worth the while.

At the Club, Roodko passed me a booklet ‘The Beatles in America' about their tour there. 
Some of the ‘youngs’ brought it with him.
I undertook to translate it, the pictures in it were more than the text.
However, without a dictionary at hand, my school stock of vocabulary allowed to understand it only here and there.
I filled the gaps with my guesses but Roodko was happy all the same.

And so it went in a circle – the hiss of steam, the rumble of the air pump, the Club, the evening check and again to the Club.
And in the morning all over again.

Now Jafarov raced into the stoker-house.
Round eyes, pale face, white marks on the back of his khaki shirt, probably, rubbed against some whitewashed wall.
‘Hide me! The Chief of Staff is after me!' 
I looked out of the door and who was there but him – making for the stoker-house from the Canteen’s kitchen with his boxer’s swagger.
Jafarov barely had time to jump through the window in the workshop into the tall grass on the other side of the stoker-house.
‘No, Comrade Major, no one was coming here.’
But he’s got scent better than any dog and in a moment from around the corner:
‘Ensign Jafarov! To me!’
Fucking caput to you, ensign.
Why does the Chief of Staff chase Jafar as if with a dick in his ass-hole?
But then, who fucking cares…

And in the evening there’s another hunt in the field.
The swarthy cowboys from the Separate Company ran down a rat and drove it into a plugged pipe then splashed gasoline there and set fire to it.
The rat jumped out and galloped around the field like a ball of flames and they followed running – some cultural and sports event...

Then at my night shift I saw a brood of rats in the passage around the furnace with the twinned boilers and screamed at them and rushed to trample, but they fled.
Why (I wondered) that sudden rat hate cropped up in me? 
The instinct of self-preservation.
They wouldn’t forgive the people, including me too, the death of that rat martyr and I rushed at them to prevent their avenge.
Fucking moron...

Once I slept on the workbench and something sat on my chest.
Something dark like a clot of black fog, sort of, and it pressed strangling.
I wanted to brush it off but had no strength to stir or even to scream it away.
Some painful stickiness.
I hardly found the strength to wake up.
Later Vanya, putting on a look of an expert, began to assure me it was a bogey. 
They're really fucking stupid in the Crimea.
Bogeys live in houses.
The stoker-house is anything but a house.
Where could a bogey pop up by us from?

What I did not tell Vanya was that the creature sat right in that place on my chest that I had shaved with the razor-machine in front of the mirror piece embedded in the wall.
Well, to get a macho look, of course, because I had there no more hairs than Vanya on his upper lip.
But it fucking did not work and the chest remained as it had been before...

After an evening check I went to Demino and there I found the house of Irina whom I met when we played dances at their club. 
She also had an elder sister.
Irina went to the kitchen and her sister began a tete-a-tete with me to the tune that Irina was only nineteen years old and hadn't come across a low-grade buster in her life yet and would I mind her looking at my military ID by the way.
That way she hinted, sort of, that her sister was a virgin.
‘No worry, I’m not a buster.’

As for the military ID kept in my jacket inner pocket, then where could I get it from?
(You open it and on the right below:
“wife Olga Abramovna”)
I had no military ID, no, they only gave us it from the safe together with a Leave Ticket and locked it up back when we returned from the city.

Then there came the husband of the elder of the two sisters, named Senya.
At first, he, like, started to be jealous, sort of, but then all of us drank tea and I left.

A week later a soldier from the Separate Company ran into the stoker-house.
There’s a girl, said he, at the corner of the wall fence that asked for me.
I went there, it was Irina.

Demino folks sometimes went from Stavropol to their village along the asphalt road on foot in twos or threes, but she was alone.

Hello. Hey. Kisses.
We agreed that after the evening check I’d come to the village.
‘Will you walk with me a little?’
That meant along the whole wall past the Staff barracks, past the checkpoint.
‘No, I’ll wait for you near that corner.’

I walked along the paths inside the battalion, parallel to the asphalt road outside.
And from that far off corner, I even walked with her a bit. 

(...now I am sorry for missing that opportunity.
After all how beautifully we could pass together along the whole construction battalion.
Leisurely.
Absorbed in each other, without any world around.
And if the on-duty ensign suddenly stopped us at the checkpoint I might tell him…

Although, who cares what exactly I might tell him if I missed it and cowardly walked inside like a worthless boob...)


At night she undressed up to her panties, but no further.
The panties were large and stretching readily.
Probably, after all those who, like me, wanted but couldn’t manage to become the buster.
In the morning I left having obtained nothing not even tea this time.

Six kilometers along an asphalt road with the nature awakening around for a new day – it’s a rare treat.
The light was flowing higher and higher, but the sun hadn’t yet risen above the horizon.

I saw a horse on a roadside hillock among the greens of broad-leaved grass and without a moment’s hesitation turned towards him.
Pure idiocy.
I had never sat on a horse in my life, but suddenly I felt like it.
He started to leave, and I ran after him but did not catch up and only thoroughly soaked my canvas pants in the thick dew on the grass.

I returned to the road and walked on yelling all sorts of songs – nobody was near to hear my crap.

‘Sleep! The night of June is just six
hours loooooooooong!’

In a week I received her letter sent from Stavropol.
‘...the soul hurts – for whom? – for you!...’
Beautiful words, but I had already been hooked and trophied by the one that ‘...was immensely happy...’

(...I never answered the letter but I sincerely hope that Irina had eventually found a worthy buster and they started a happy and wealthy and blissful life since then…)

After serving for one year in the ranks of the armed forces of the USSR a serviceman was eligible for a 10-day furlough to visit his home – from where he was drafted. 
When I mentioned that to Major Avetisian he did not want even to listen.
How could Vanya withstand ten days alone?

Vanya said that yes, he was up to the task and Major Avetisian promised me the leave, so be it,  under the condition that I do a cosmetic renovation of the stoker-house. 
That is, I had to whitewash it from inside.
The locksmith, private Ter-Terian, showed me the place in the tall grass where the lime, not utilized at the previous renovations, was buried in the ground. 

I loaded it in portions in a bath basin with ears, added water, dragged it up onto the furnaces to reach the ceiling and with a broad brush – ...slip-slop… slop-slup… – whitewashed where I could reach.
Then I took a long iron ladder from the locksmith Ter-Terian and leaned it against the walls and at some places against the pipes run under the ceiling –  – ...slip-slop… slop-slup… – it’s just a circus and nothing else  – ...slip-slop… slop-slup… – Do boys whitewash a fence every day?

But no Tom Sawyer wouldn't stand a week of circus-like renovation – two spacey tall halls and huge furnaces in each with a pair of twinned boilers. 
Anticipation – that’s what helped me to hold out that week.
After all, Olga and I  – ...slip-slop…– so many things we hadn’t  tried yet  – ...slip-slip-slip-slop!.. – we’d do it that way and even so  – ...slop!. ...slop!....slop!. slop-slup!.. – ten nights that would shatter the world – ...slip-slip-slip-slop!. slop-slup!.

And now the renovation was over.
The concrete floor in both halls bore variously shaped white splotches even after I swept it.
The pipes under the ceiling got hastily wiped.

The whitewashing if not too uniform but then universal – without left-out spots.
Two huge halls and two gigantic furnaces.

‘Comrade Major, the renovation is done.’
‘And you call this a renovation?’
‘Comrade Major, you promised...’
“I hadn’t promise anything!’
So Major Avetisian had fucked Tom Sawyer.

SLIP-SLOP!!

At the end of the day, Gray came to the stoker-house. 
‘Got the fuck?’
‘Yea.’
In the construction battalion, everyone knew everything about everybody else. 
‘Fuck him. Now we’ll have a flight to Paris.’

From the inner pocket of his jacket, he took out a folded sheet of newspaper opened the place marked with a brownish thin plate, broke a pinch of it off and folded the newspaper as it was. 

Then he pressed and rolled a ‘Belomor-Canal’ cigarette until all the tobacco poured into his palm.
He sprinkled it with the crumbled pinch and mixed all up.
The tube of the emptied cigarette with tiny jerks consumed the mixture and got filled back.

Although I had never seen it done before, I still knew that he was stuffing a joint. 
‘Spark.' He brought up a burning match. ‘Keep the smoke in you.' 

We smoked the joint passing it to each other.
I diligently copied his way of inhaling and keeping the smoke in the lungs.
‘So what?’
‘What what?’
‘You ask? Wasn’t you fucking touched? Well, you’re some moose!’
‘I’m sorry.’
Disappointed, he left for the evening check...

A week later on my day shift a pair of soldiers of the Central Asian appearance modestly entered the stoker-house filled with the howling duet of the furnace and pump.
Maybe from the Separate Company, if not from the Crimean draft.
‘We a-need sieve it.’ one of them said timidly.
‘What?’
‘Da ganja. You knows yoursel.’
I did not really understand what all that was about yet it's inconvenient to look ignorant before the ‘young' ones. 
‘Okay.’

They came out and returned already four, carrying some burlap bags.
I took them to the workshop room and returned to watch the howlers.

A couple of times I checked into the workshop with the grass spread out on the workbench. 
They greeted me with mute grateful smiles and I went back – why to interfere with busy people knowing their job?

They left in two hours when it was already quiet in the stoker-house.
‘We there a-left.’ said the last in their file with a joyful smile.
In a shallow plywood box that had long been kicking around on the workbench, a handful of brownish sticky dust had been poured.
I put it into the iron box next to the never used hammer-with-chisel and forgot.

Of course, I remembered about that box when on the payday instead of the usual ‘Prima’ I bought ‘Belomor-Canal’.
Repeating the procedure demonstrated by Gray I stuffed a joint and sparked.

Vo-oh!
What the tha-at?
And I swam up to the mirror peeping from the wall and looked into to make sure there really was no one behind because there was a clear feeling that as if my head was like a balloon that was not filled too tight and you could jab it from opposite sides but not so much as to burst it just twist your fingers inside where they do not reach each other as I was now feeling jabbed through my temples and they twisted inside the brain convolutions but in the mirror there was only just me without anyone but then yes it was only very necessary to go and check the manometer glass or else we all will fly away and very high
 … you are the moose yourself, Gray...


(...so I became a ‘nashavan’, one of the enlightened initiates who get the drag from cannabis, aka marijuana, aka grass, aka anasha, aka…)

One of the first to know about my transition to a new quality was Guirok, a descendant of German colonists, the warrant officer from the Fourth Company.
He saw me engulfed in a stunned reading from the scraps of the last year's issue of the Red Star glued on a tin stand in the grass near the concrete edge of the drill ground. 
The sun was pouring its scorching heat on my aft cap.

So what? Like to political studies, like, I’m preparing…
Americans again defeated in Vietnam, our correspondent from Saigon…

He approached me on the right but seeing that the ‘Belomor-Canal' in my hands was smoked up to its paper mouthpiece and there was not even a ‘heel' left, he smiled a weak smile, licked his dry lips and melted away in the heat... 

The veil of misunderstanding got slipped off from my enlightened eyes and the revelation came that everyone in the Orion was on the drag and everyone in their own way.
Karpesha and Pickle in a businesslike manner.
Jafarov – softly.
Roodko was following the homeopathic system of small buoys at a certain interval of time. 
Robert – when they treated him, but not always.
It looked like I almost got late for a departing train.

But the coolest grass had Sasha Lopatko, the Club painter.
In his room, I was getting in the state of weightlessness as if in the orbital space station Salyut. 
Only not often because of his meanness.
Roodko also said that he had never seen such a terrible egoist in his life.
And strange it seemed indeed when having such a good father – a minister of the cult, who should have inoculated to his son the love towards your neighbor… 

(...when under the influence, the drag is of different kinds, say, you become so calm, you feel good, fluffy, and you want everyone to feel good and you don’t want to disturb anyone’s fluff.

 Or you suddenly notice some funny side in the surrounding reality and – you’re done, you just cannot stop, you’ll laugh until completely exhausted, then you’ll catch your breath and start again.
That drag is called ‘to catch the arrival’
This is the most dangerous drag if you are a TV announcer.

Still another time you can get concentrated on doing something and you do it, and do, and do – it had long already been not necessary but you still go on doing.
Like that team of zeks who felled a grove of oak trees with two jigsaws. 

Or, else, the ‘piggy’ drag; this is when you get started to eat something and suddenly such a gamma of taste sensation unfolds that you without noticing it can put away a whole pot of cold macaroni to the bottom.

And in general, you become clever, judicious; someone comes up to you ‘hello, how’s your nothing?’ and you already know beforehand at what minute he will beg for a joint.

Or just such thoughts come to you – fucking Isaac Newton! – but they do not linger, one thing or another distract you.
On the whole a play of shadows on the veil of swirling mist fog.

Music listening at high – that's the highest drag…) 

We had a record player on the bookshelf with an LP disk ‘Burn’ by the ‘Deep Purple’.
I sat on the floor next to a speaker with the cover in my hands and could consider it till one side played to the end – there were their busts, like, in bronze with a tongue of flame from each one's head, like a lighter, the dudes understood how to drag. 

The very bummer when anasha suddenly ran out, to whomever you rolled up – no one had.
That was called ‘empty suction’.
Everyone became evil as dogs because of the fucking khoomar that pressed, some dudes even went to pieces.
No kidding, they got breaking.
Some sore sight.

Once Gray heated me with pills that he brought from the city.
‘Would ye?’
‘What’s that?’
‘Nyshtyak’.
‘Okay’.
He was passing them, one by one, and I swallowed.
With the half of the pack over I said: 
‘And what’s the dose?’
‘All's nyshtyak.' 
So I consumed the whole pack. 

Then a roar flooded the ears, as from a waterfall and the night got dense and dark around.
Oh, the stoker-house. 
Vanya’s shift…
I entered.
He talked to me but I couldn’t get it at all.
Then I began to walk around the furnace, what for?
He told me later that at one point I stopped in the dark passage and stood there for half an hour as a monument.
In bronze.

And, most importantly, I was afraid of going to bed – what if somehow getting asleep I wouldn’t wake up?
But eventually, I came to myself. 
And Gray was just a bitchy scumbag not knowing the dose himself. 
Kinda experimenting on people whether I’d survive or not.
‘You’re some fucking moose!’

Vanya’s wife came on a visit from their Crimea village.
It seemed the conbat was just the club of married dolts.
Again I was pulling at the stoker-house one shift after another.

She left, Vanya changed from the parade crap into canvas outfit and came to the stoker-house as sad as the sadness itself.
It was dark outside the windows.
And then Roodko came.
He had a cold again and in the Medical Unit, they gave him some powder for doing inhalation. 
With a tin cup taken at dishwashers', he came to the stoker-house.
He poured the powder in the cup, added boiled water from the boiler tap and covered the cup with a piece of cardboard, like sort of a lid so that the mixture did not cool down right away.
So we sat with him at the round table talking our talks.
And, on the way, Roodko would move the cardboard, aka lid, sniff at the cup a time or two, cover it again and we would go on talking.

By that moment in his army service Vanya had already seen different sights in the stoker-house and now, from the dark next hall he followed all these manipulations and made his conclusions.
With decisive strides, he neared the round table and: 
‘Roodko! Gimme too!’
‘What to give?’
‘Well, this!’
And he pointed at the Roodko’s contraption.
Roodko was naive as any other intellectual, and he thought if he had a cold then others also could have it. 
‘Welcome.’

Vanya pulled the cardboard off, took a couple of deep sniffs, filling himself to the heels, and I saw how his eyes rolled under his forehead and even crosswise. 
And what? I’d believe it.
Self-hypnosis is a great power.
Faith moves the mountains.
Vanya believed that Roodko was consuming the fucking ‘blue fairy' by bucketfuls there and now he each moment could fall into hallucinatory strawberry fields. 
One had to save the buddy.

‘Vanya,' said I, ‘the other day in the Canteen I talked with a Tatar from your draft.' 
‘And what?’
‘Nothing special. I say, "friend, what’s your name?", and he answers "me Russian no understand". ‘Okay,’ says I, ‘it’s a clear matter, but how much do you have to serve yet?’ And here he at once clutches his head, ‘Vooy! Fucking too much!’ says he. So, Vanya, maybe it was a friend of yours?’
In short, I had pumped the partner back from hallucinations. 
That’s the law of military friendship – help your comrade out even by the cost of your own life...

In my opinion, the Orion provided its music services free of charge, that is for nothing. 
In any case, I do not remember any talks about any money for ‘doing trash’.
For us, the Orion members, just breaking beyond the limits of the Military Detachment 41769, playing dances for people dressed in civilian clothes was an invaluable payment itself.
So, if you like, we were paid with the minutes of freedom.
Time is money.

Was there some dough sticking to a palm at the commanding level?
I mean to Zampolit of our construction battalion. 
I have no idea, and I have no inclination to lie.

With the draft from Simferopol, one more musician, Yura Nikolaev, came and joined the Orion.
He knew his own worth.
His price-list he studied in his civilian life working in a restaurant on the rhythm guitar.
And he also sang (without particular voice range and without particular crap) within the framework of usual orders from restaurant revelers, heated by a couple decanters with vodka. 

‘Here’s water, cool, good water!
Water and vodka is a nice thing, gentlemen!' 

After the third decanter, it was time for hard rock: 

‘...by softly murmuring waters of the Nile, 
Free of care, of pains, of nasty neighbors,
There lived happy little green crocodile!..’

And when the client got fully ripe, the surrealistic splashes flew forth:

‘The firewood bloomed and horses were a-twitting,
A camel came from Africa on skates...’

So my presence in the Orion was justified by merely a couple of old numbers but the ensign appointed to supervise us at playing out of the battalion could not inform Zampolit that I was going with the ensemble for no good reasons.
And I was not alone in getting something for nothing – two or three chmomen usually went along with the fictitious position of the sound engineer. 

But playing dances was a seasonal affair.
The Orion played outside the VSO-11, mainly at the New Year parties.
Only once we were engaged in summer, or rather in the beginning of autumn. 
It was a party at the bakery plant. 
Whether it was the same one where we had been collecting alms from the production line conveyors I cannot know.
At the time of dances, I saw only the courtyard enclosed by the locked truck boxes and the three-story building of the Plant Management. 
The party buzzed on the second floor.

Of course, I danced a lot and one of my partners got so charmed that with no hesitation went out the hall at my suggestion.
We climbed the dark staircase to the third floor but there on the landing in front of the closed door to a corridor those chmo sound engineers were drinking wine. 

On the ground floor, the picture almost repeated itself only there it was her female co-employees smoking cigarettes. 
I led her to the exit and she obediently followed into the yard.
Aw, FUCK!!

The bare asphalt area was flooded with arc light.
Not a single shadow.
The only shaded place was the anthracite black strip of shadow from the pillar that held the dazzling arc lamp in the middle of the yard.
I was like that puppy Tuzik who snitched off a rubber hot water bottle but couldn't find a place to tear it up.
And I led her back.

Probably, she was disappointed with my lack of determination and surrender before the unpretentious minimalism of the situation.
She did not appear to the date appointed in the park the next evening.

I circled the dark alleys, stood for a while by the brightly lit Dance-Floor inside whose coral the youth of Stavropol were enjoying their rest, although it was dangerous – a military patrol could see from afar a soldier in a casual wear outfit.
She was nowhere and no the chances were against her popping up.
It’s time to sound the retreat.

‘Have you got matches, soldier?’
A long-haired guy with a shoulder bag on a wide strap addressed me. 
I took the matches from my pants pocket and handed out.
He took the matchbox and unzipped his bag.
On the top, apart from a cigarette pack lay a box of matches.
‘Oh! I’m so forgetful. Will you?’
He stretched out the pack opening the lid on the filters.
I pulled one out.
‘Ah, it’s so noisy here, giving me a headache. Will we walk a little?’
With his right hand, he shook up the wide curls of his dark bob cut hair. 

...hell, I don't understand… is he seducing me?. 
A short neat guy, long hair, a bag under his elbow.
‘Why not?’

We retreated together followed by glances of folks standing outside the fence of the Dance-Floor, that part of the public that never enters inside. 
Slowly strolling we went nowhere in particular.
He kept talking and talking. 
Such feminine intonations.
He told me a joke from the life of gays. 
In Moscow, one of them was caught and beaten up at a militia station and he yelled at the execution: 
‘Oh, Captain, I only wanted in my mouth, not in the teeth!' 
A play on words, but not funny, though clear enough.
And with him everything was clear.
I just wondered what’s next.

‘Would you like some wine?
‘Why not?’
We went to a nearby deli.
There was almost no line there.
He joyfully consulted with me if that wine over the counter was good.
That was the first time I'd ever seen such a thing – ‘Mountain Flower'. 
The shop was flooded with light and silent stares from the other customers.
He happily punched a check at the cashier and but the bottle into his dangling bag.

We returned to the park, to its upper part, where there were no benches and no lights from the street.
Standing in the darkness by the line of trimmed bushes, we drank wine, not all of it.
He dropped right in front of me on his knees and unbuttoned the fly in my pants.

In general, at first, it exited.
Then it became warm and wet.
His head, barely visible in the dark, pumped back-and-forth.
I moved the plate of my loosened belt behind, on my back, so that he did not hit his forehead against it. 

He changed the rhythm, changed the tempo.
He took a rest then started again. 
...somehow it's … monotonous... 
...for how long should I stand like this?. 

Chmo-ook.

..what?.. a time-out again?. 

‘You scoundrel! You’ve been with a slut! So you cannot come! A nasty scoundrel!
‘No, I haven’t.’
I buttoned up under his plaintive complains that I had such a suitable dick—exactly thirteen!—but nothing happened.
The discrepancy between his expert estimation and the measurements, once taken at a midday break at the KaPeVeRrZe Plant, did not hurt me taking into account his disappointment – so many efforts in vain.
Besides, he paid for the wine.
‘There still remains some – will you?' 
‘Ah, no.’

I finished the dolorous mountain flower under his story that he was passing from Nalchik, where some very important director of a very important enterprise made him such when he was still a boy. 
Then he embraced me for goodbye, but did not kiss—I had been with a slut, a nasty scoundrel, and had to face the music for that—and he left with a sentimentally luring gait towards the street lamps behind the park trees.

A boy from the city of Nalchik.
From his sad joke, it's easy to guess that gay life was not a bed of roses – keep low and hide until they would catch you. 
So what? Time to make for home, ain’t it?..

A letter came from Olga that she got a letter from my fellow serviceman.
He anonymously informed her of my amorous unauthorized marches in different directions from the location of the Military Detachment 41769, aka VSO-11.

I was indignant at the insolence of filthy insinuations.
After all neither in Demino nor at the bakery plant nothing happened! 
And the gay was not to be counted at all – I didn't even cum. 

Therefore in the letter of reply, I openly and honestly stated that there had been nothing of the kind and she should send that anonymous letter for carrying out a graphological examination and taking appropriate measures against that dirty bitch of my fellow serviceman. 

In her respective reply, she reported that the letter with fictions about my allegedly unstable behavior plunged her into a state of affectation at which point she tore the letter into tiny shreds. 

(...and here I again stumble on transcendence.
What for?
What’s the use of it for the anonymous serviceman?
And if Olga just tried to check me, then all the same – why?
A clear proof that possibilities of a human mind are limited.
In any case, those of mine…)

Vanya left for the evening check, it was my shift.
Gray came and brought with him a ‘young’ driver from the Simferopol draft.
Both were tight; the ‘young’ obviously had money that’s why Gray palled up with him.

And then Gray started up some strange crap, like, the guys had a gripe about me.
I couldn’t understand. What guys? What beefs?
Now you'd see, said he, and latched the front door. 

The three of us went on to the workshop room and Gray at once sneaked out.
I did not understand.
The ‘young’ looking aside asked:
‘Why d’you fink on guys?’
And he shot a fist into my face.
I shielded with my shoulder and jumped past him out of the door, the guy followed.
Behind the furnace, there was a breaker. 
I grabbed it and shouted,
‘Gray! Who the fuck did I fink on?’

Gray stood in the dark passage nearby.
Seeing me with a breaker he pelted body blows and I dropped the breaker.
After all, I had grabbed it instinctively, just for a warning. 
At that moment the iron shutter under the window moved and Sasha Khvorostyuk from our draft crawled in on his four, in boots and underpants and with a towel hanging from his neck.
He clearly was going to take a shower in the pump station room but the entrance was latched from inside.
Gray yelled at him,
‘Get the fuck out of here!’

Sasha crawled backward away and Gray turned to me again.
And my chest was bleeding – the jacket on me was unbuttoned and one of his blows had torn off the birthmark. 
Gray saw there was fucking lots of blood and he didn’t know what was in the room between me and the ‘young’ and he hadn’t gone too blind not to see the chance to get fucked up into the penal battalion.
So he just croaked a couple of times, ‘Look out!. The guys!..’
And they left.

So I didn’t understand what the fuck that all was about.
Later I saw him and asked.
He did not say anything clear, again ‘Look out! If there something..’
In short, he started selling himself for a zone master-thief.

Since then I had something to busy myself with at my shifts.
The pump engine was howling the boiler hissing and I, with my elbows planted into the round table and my head leaned against my raised hands, was thinking about one and the same thing.
Thinking for hours.
How do I bump Gray off? 

Bumping off, of course, was not a problem, with that same breaker but what then?
It was necessary to whack him and cop out – and how?
There was not anything even to dig a hole in the field, just a hammer-and-chisel in the workshop.
Ask someone for a shovel?
Bullshit.
Or, say in the pump station room, in that pit always filled with water.
It’s deep enough, to hitch a load and drop there.
But what if the water starts to stench with the corpse decomposing?

The rightest way was to shove it in the furnace of the boiler, the flame from the nozzle there shot out for at least two meters and would incinerate it without a trace.
That’s only Vanya would come for his shift and the stoker-house full of fried meat smell – how to explain?

The problem clearly had no solution and I, week after week, moved in a vicious circle until the on-duty cook would come and say it was time to turn off the boiler. 

Who knows, maybe I would have coped with that quadrangle of the circle but then the Tula draft was demobilized and they drove in new ‘youngs’ from Uzbekistan and Stavropol Region and Major Avetisian kicked me out of the stoker-house replacing with someone from Pyatigorsk city.

Fare thee well, Vanya!
And you, the round table, a confidant of silent fruitless meditations…

Yes, I became a ‘grandpa’ and I really felt it when I entered the sorteer and saw there Vasya from Buryn with whom we were slaving in the squad-team of Prostomolotov.
Vasya was squatting over an ochco holding an open newspaper before his nose.
That’s the fuck!
A picture by Repin – a squatter in the reading-room.
And he, so imposing, with the wide belt hung from around his neck, like a muffler, in a business-like manner was sort of checking the news of the day.
And then that cuntfucker finished me off completely.
He raised a little bit, benevolently nodded and said:
‘Good evening!’
I was fucking fucked to pieces.
That’s some Vasya!
Where did he fucking find such words?

My ‘grandpa’ period of service was passing pretty chaotically.
I no longer belonged to the gang of chmomen but the commanding officers were too lazy to transfer me from the Fourth Company somewhere else for only six months. 
So I had to work here and there.
Most of all at the MCU.

The MCU was no Missile Controlling Unit, but a mortar-concrete unit.
Although, a ‘grandpa’, of course, wouldn’t die of overwork.
I could shove the sand with a shovel and I could not shove the sand with the shovel, it depended.
The squad-team there was commanded by Misha Khmelnitsky from our draft.
He had become so solid, with a sergeant strips across his shoulders.
And he roughed the ‘youngs’ as we had been roughed so long before...


And I was also being sent to a brick factory where there were no squad-teams or ‘youngs’.
My job was stacking clamp, raw bricks,  in the ring kiln for burning.
The ring kiln from inside is a low arched tunnel and it works continuously.
At one spot a conveyor brings raw bricks through the opening in the wall—be quick to stack them in rows up to the ceiling!—and on the other side of the ring kiln diameter, the fire rages from the nozzles in the arched walls to bake bricks. 
The heat, of course, is felt even here and you have to work in an undershirt.
A much hotter job is loading of freshly baked bricks on that same conveyor only moving already in the opposite direction.
The heat pierces the mittens on your hands and radiates from the walls around and you have to undress to boots and pants.
And the following shift would be stacking raw bricks here again and so without an end – the loop cycle of the ring kiln...

And I started to spend more time in the barracks.
In case of abnormal situations, the younger drafts approached me for advice. 
For example, a taxi pulled up outside the wall-fence bringing a sergeant from our Company – blind, deaf and dead.
They called me, I checked – right, it's ours, stretched over the back seat, naked to the waist. 
The taxi driver said no fee, thank you, just take the crap away.
And the sergeant a real boar, it took three ‘youngs' to plop him over the wall into a snowdrift. 
Then into the dryer room next to the on-duty's cabinet-box, where the jackets were dried after the working day, he dried there too till the morning. 

The Uzbeks once treated me from a parcel received from their home. 
Dried melon plated in a braid. Sweet.
I remembered the parcel from my parents  – four cans of condensed milk taken to the Club.
And the Uzbeks had come up and treated on their own accord I would never know they had a parcel.
Probably, because of even being a ‘grandpa’ I never hewed from their rations of butter and sugar in the Canteen.

The Commander of the Fourth Company, Captain Chernykh, was transferred somewhere from the construction battalion or maybe his penalty stretch was over. 
The lieutenant was appointed a temporary commander.
The guys started a grumble – the Separate or the Third Companies watch TV but our box was dead for the second year, weren’t we people too?
So the Battalion Commander organized an exemplary meeting of the company personnel in the Leninist room. 

He sat on the table, like, Prince Charming, the trousers jerked up to the knees to demonstrate gray fur above his shoes and socks.
And we all in front of him on stools brought from the barracks waiting to hear some sage advice.
The Spanish artist Goya drew a whole series of such pictures.

‘Are you fucking going on strike? Eh?
Stupid dicks! It’s not Italy for you here!
The motherfuckers have spaghetti there!
One macaroni is long, the other – short.
Because fucking broken in halves!’

And, on giving out this monologue, he sat on in his nest, contentedly turning his glasses from side to side.
The eagle-owl fur-legged, digesting what fucking folly he had threw up right now.
And we sat opposite staring at him as faithfully as we should. 

But behind the statutory look that the Commanders were supposed to have of me, I recalled the story of Pickle about the hermaphrodite Sofochka from the Orel draft. 

Her parents had to shell out for the medical commission to turn a blind eye to some unusual features in their child physiological structure because of they wanted to have a rest for at least two years. 
Sofochka was sent to the construction battalion in order to make a real man out of her...

Shortly before the Orel draft demobilization in the barracks of the Fourth Company, there developed an explosive love triangle around the pretty dembel. 
She was giving her favor to two of her fellow servicemen at once.
The buddies couldn’t find a peaceful solution to the question: on whose bunk bed should she come after the lights-out?

Then in the same Leninist room, a meeting was arranged as well. 
Pickle could be sitting on the same very stool that now was under me when the Battalion Commander put the question squarely: 
‘Sofa, fuck your mother, tell me – you got a dick or a cunt there, after all?’

The rank-and-file serviceman rose from his stool and, having approached the senior in rank, dealt a slap in the face:
‘The old goat!’
Proudly rolling her hips she returned to the stool with her back to the happy squeaks of a laughing owl.
Fathers-Commanders.
Some fucking army!. 

I hardly would believe in the possibility of drafting a hermaphrodite to the army but the details of Pickle's story too much fitted the surrounding reality.

I returned to the current meeting in time for the concluding address from the lieutenant-colonel from his nest.
‘You are given the highest matter, fuck!
The brain!
The gray, fucking, stuff!.’
Yeah, he seemed having been bored already into his next gyrus.
You're in the fucking army now. 
Aw, fuck!.

At the Morning Dispensing the Chief Of Staff announced that the day before he saw a soldier from our battalion floundering in an AWOL. 
He had even chased the fucker but couldn’t take over.
However, the just retribution could never be avoided. 
Now the Chief of Staff would pass along the ranks and find the defamatory stain on our battalion’s glorious name.
And he paced along scanning carefully the petrified faces of the First Company, the Second Company, the Third Company, the Fourth Company.
A fig for you, Major! Only the gate remained and the road outside it.
He slowly retraced along the ranks.

That’s dumb.
If you were chasing someone yesterday, there's no chance he would come to the Morning Dispensing.
Go and wipe up your drivel.
Now he’s kicking back around in a drier room.
Or substituting the on-duty serviceman. 
Or it even could be one of those workers who did not come for months from the city.
The Major started his third attempt, fucking optimist.
The first Company the Second Company, the Third Company, and the Fourth Company.
Now happy?
A stupid head gives no rest to legs.
That’s some fucking arm…

‘Here he is!’
The Major’s boxing finger pointed at me.
‘What?! If you’d chased me I’d be screwed before the Dispensing!’
‘To the clink!’
The on-duty officer and two ‘dippers’ with red armbands approached me demanding to hand in my belt and escorted me to the checkpoint house.
On the move, I still continued to debate that he, the bitch, knew himself it was not me, but they locked me in the clink all the same.

About an hour later the on-duty officer unlocked the door and gave my belt back to me.
I was assigned to penalty work – sprinkling sand over ice covering the road to the city.
The truck with the sand was at the gate already.

Squinting my eyes in the whistling wind I honestly threw shovelfuls of sand over the iron back side of the moving truck.
When it entered the city and went for the next load of sand, our diverged at the nearest traffic lights.

Then I jackalled for a bottle or two and woke up already at twilight sitting on a bench at the bottom of the Komsomol Gorka hill.
It turned out that the blizzard had already subsided; big snowflakes slowly downed from the dark above and melted on my face and on my chest in the wide-open pea jacket.
The passers-by flow was adding – the end of working day for non-manual employees.
They hurried home, they had nothing to do with a lonely soldier resting peacefully on the bench.

‘Hey!’
Someone still shook my knee.
‘Fuck you fucking faker!’
‘How dare you? I’m a KGB worker!’
‘Fuck you together with your KGB!’
‘Wait! I’ll call a patrol!’

Then I boarded a bus filled to the utmost.
I was rocking from hypothermia and in the dense mass of passengers there suddenly opened a free tunnel straight to a vacant seat.
Yes, our people love and respect the defenders of the Homeland...

We played at the New Year party of the Culinary College.
More precisely, they played it and I was simply a  body inertially following the Orion. 

The autumn draft from Pyatigorsk brought to the conbat some Volodya, aka Long.
He was not only long but also skinny, with dark circles under his eyes as fit an intravenous drug user. 
But he played a solo guitar as the guitarist from ‘Led Zeppelin’ in the disk ‘Stairway to Heaven’.

Roodko worshipped him and I also admired his technique but he was a piece of crap as a person.
‘Why are you the way you are, Long?’
‘I always show all my shit so that all piss off and leave me alone.’
He had a pleasant laugh but laughed rarely.
All in all, he was just a kid, but a god on the guitar. 

Sure enough, the construction battalion ensemble did nor perform the numbers from ‘Stair in Heaven’ but Long inserted such breaks in the Orion repertoire that even Jimmy Page wouldn't be ashamed of.
His buddy from Pyatigorsk brought him his guitar from home and also became the Orion drummer for the New Year season.
He played in one group with Long before they drafted the guitarist.
After the New Year season, he took Long's guitar back to Pyatigorsk. 
You couldn’t keep such things at the Club...

Yura Nikolayev, the star of the Crimean taverns, and Sasha Roodko, a virtuoso from the Dnepropetrovsk Philharmonic, were the vocalists at the New Year parties. 
Each one in his inherent and unimitable style accompanied with the improvised breaks from Jimmy Page, or, for a change, Hendrix who was also Jimmy. 
But for a normal music lover from the hinterland, nourished on the classical examples of the Soviet variety pop, such variations sounded unacceptably cacophonic, since they were not Kobzon-like in any way. 

So one of the future cooks had a legitimate reason to approach Yura Nikolayev and ask:
‘Sogwe, can you play Gussian folk music?’
That’s how she screwed words up with her burr.

And Yura knew that Roodko fell under the influence of Long whose word became the last and decisive in what to play and how to do it.
Therefore he directed the girl straight to Long so that she wouldn't lose time in vain.

And Long at the moment was completely lost in the Dryland inside his mouth, sprawling on a chair with his legs far away and wide apart, with his parade-crap jacket hung on the back of the chair, but the khaki tie in its place, only thrown over Long's shoulder. 
And he fixedly stared at something among the distant sand dunes licking his scorched lips with raspy dry tongue. 
‘Sogwe, do you have Gussian songs in yougg gwepegtoigwe?’

With the superhuman effort, the warrior on the chair gathered all his will together, concentrated, 
focused his optic organs in the direction of the remote sounds and discerned that a girl was speaking to him.
‘Gussian?  Gwepegtoigwe? Go stgaight to Comgade Goodko!' and he pointed his index finger at Sasha Roodko who stood by the loudspeaker box twirling sadly the volume knob of his bass guitar amp.

The girl was baffled, sure thing, being ping-ponged so from one musician to another, but she obviously was a sturdy backcountry strain and went all the way to the Orion nominal leader. 

‘I am vegwe sogwe,’ replied Roodko, and looked with his intrinsic foggy blue gaze, ‘but we genegally don’t play Gussian songs.’
And he sorrowfully sniffed with his nose.
He would be happy to say it some other way but he couldn’t because of his own burr.
But she did not know about that!

Now, go and talk about congenial complexes but everything—EVERY THING!—is acquired with what we are having experienced... 

That evening I had a kissing session with Valya Papayani, a Stavropol Greek woman.
Nothing more than kisses.
She told she was a teacher at that Culinary College and she was twenty-seven years old. 

So the next morning the Battalion Commander announced at the Dispensing:
‘Yesturday, one of our fucking musicians spread out a sixty-seven-old slut at the bottom of a staircase!' 
That marasmus-driven fucker couldn't even see twenty-seven from sixty-seven! 
Of course, it was that piece of shit, the ensign-supervisor who finked on me...

Two days later there was another New Year party somewhere else, but I did not dance there at all.
Because of so superior grass quality.
That was the grass of all the grass.
We sparked on the stairs and then went into the hall. 
The guys took their instruments so tenderly and gently and started to play
And the music was quiet as if from over the distant horizon and—which was characteristic—volume down. 
You could put your head to the loudspeaker and see how it quaked with the sound, but all the same somehow muffled.

Then I went to wander around the hall.
And the people there were (each of them) as if sawed out from the plywood, that is two-dimensional all of them.
I wanted to see what was on the backside of their plywood, but it did not work out because someone next got drawn into the picture and it was a two-dimensional one too. 
And, from far away, such slow and low – music… 
 
Sometimes above all their heads, on a pair of stems there floated a pair of eyeballs—like periscopes—those pseudo sound engineers were roaming the space stoned to death.
So funny bastards!. 
And they laughed too.
Where did they get that grass? 

We were brought home by midnight. 
There was a creaking Arctic frost.
Under the light of the spiky stars in the sky, we dragged the equipment onto the scene of the empty cold cinema hall. 
No one spoke a word.
No strength.
No desire to.
Because of All was emptiness.
The emptiness of emptiness and nothing but emptiness... 

Ah, yes! 
With the same autumn draft they had also driven in guys from Moldova and Moscow, but few of them – about ten people.
Moldovans had quite funny last names – Rahroo, Shooshoo.
The first names were normal though.

Vasya Shooshoo received a postal notification about a parcel from home awaiting him at the city main post office. 
To receive it he took with him Lyolik from Moscow, Vitalik from Simferopol and me too.

We collected the parcel and went into some canteen in the city, on the second floor.
Vasya opened it and there was,

‘Wine of Moldavia, my boy,
Created to present us joy!.’

Vasya took some macaroni with something on top and we held the cups in our hands hidden under the table for Vasya to fill them from the bottles without superfluous discussions with the canteen personnel. 
That way we finished off I didn’t know how many liters.
Well, what now?
Saddle up!
We went down to the first floor and Lyolik pissed there into a trash urn, while Vitalik, like, fenced him off to observe decency in the eyes of the public.

That Lyolik was generally frostbitten.
I once went to the construction materials factory and there was such a long conveyor going high up under the roof to transport clay or something.
Lyolik’s job there was to go up and down along that conveyor with a breaker and prod what clay had got jammed on the conveyor.

I can’t remember exactly what I went there for, but when Lyolik saw me the breaker in his hands fluttered in eager agitation.
And it was in his eyes how really much he wanted to bump me off.
Not for anything personal, just so, because of I turned up there the moment he had the breaker in his hands.
Apparently, he also hadn’t the quadrangle of the circle solved yet.
Bashing brains in with a breaker’s not a problem, but what then with the body?
In short, he took himself in hand that time.

We left the canteen and strolled along, talking.
Bright sun, white snow, life’s beautiful.
Then Lyolik and Vasya started to sort it out whose homeland was better – Moscow or Moldova?
Thus, word by word, they went over to clutching each other pea jackets’ breasts.
But Vitalik—that’s a fine fellow!—why, says he, on the street? Let’s go in some yard.

We went into the yard of some two-story apartment building.
Vitalik started reading instructions to them, sort of, a referee from London. 
No fighting with the belt plates, no kicking of the felled.
They threw off their belts and hats, and jackets, and – off they started the fun of heroes.
Both were above a meter and eighty with the fists like sledgehammers.
From each scored hit the echo echoed around the yard.
Ahey! Let’s sprinkle the snow with the red!

Vasya broke Lyolik’s brow.
Lyolik, bleeding, fell on one knee.
Vasya moved back to the ropes with linen – the real heroes observe the rules.

At that moment some mujik in a sailor’s striped vest ran down the porch of the two-story apartment block.
Someone of his rats of neighbors, says he, had called to the militia.
In short, the match had to be postponed.
Lyolik washed his mug with the snow, the servicemen put their outfits on and left the stadium.

But the fighters’ agitation did not abate.
We had to split into pairs.
I led Lyolik ahead, convincing him that Moscow was the capital of our Homeland, the best city on the Earth.
About ten meters behind Vitalik and Vasya followed, discussing Făt-Frumos.
Thus, in peaceful conversations slowly strolled we on.

And suddenly on the right, a Volga braked and two militiamen in greatcoats jumped out of it on the sidewalk. 
Lyolik and I unfastened our belts and noosed them round the right wrists leaving some length with the plate on its end for self-defense. 
The militiaman on the left flicked up the gun. 
A ludicrously small black hole in the bright ring of reflected sunshine looked into my face.

And then the second pair of the interlocutors arrived at the epicenter of discontent. 
They had been so carried away by the conversation that had not been looking around.
And all of a sudden—ta-dah!—an abrupt change of the scenery: two soldiers armed with plates on their belts against two militiamen with a gun. 
From the overabundance of feelings and associations, Vitalik's legs bent limply and only at the last moment, he managed to lean his back against the fence... 

Glory, glory be sung to you, the blessed land of Moldovia!
You had conceived and brought forth Vasya Shooshoo,  the Valiant!
The true warrior, filled with the spirit of combat brotherhood, seized he with mighty embrace the nearest to him militiaman—the one without a gun it was—and cried:
‘Run!’
He did not need to repeat it for me twice.

Oh, Gods! How frightened was I! How I fled!
Around and below me some fences, trees, alleys, hills, gullies, ramparts, and mountain ridges flashed…

To myself, I came only in some shed with wide longitudinal gaps in its walls between the horizontally nailed boards where it took a considerable period of time to put my breath into a normal shape.

In the evening only Lyolik showed up in the barracks.
He needed to wash his jacket of the blood from the broken eyebrow.
I led him to the stoker-house.
There they also had their news.
The lining of one of the furnaces had cracked, most likely because of the overheating of the boiler.
 During the accident, the smoke was pouring out from multiple cracks, full of black soot, obviously, which settled on the walls and the ceiling in both halls of the stoker-house. 
My cosmetic renovation was evenly lost under greasy black.

(...did I gloat?
If I did, then not too much – by that time I didn’t care a fuck about anything…)

Bulk materials are transported in special railway cars without a roof and the floor in such cars is a series of iron hatches.
When unloading, you knock aside the hook-lock placed outside, the hatch-lid falls down and the material spills out.
I do not know for which organization those five cars came to the station of Stavropol, but I can vividly see how they flapped the hatches open and nothing came out, then they looked from below in those hatches and saw a fine-grained monolith. 
The sand had been sent wet or soaked with rains on the way from some warmer corner of our unembraceable Mother Homeland and the consequent frosts along the endless way turned it into five huge parallelepipeds of carload in the shape of the car insides. 

There was no time  to wait for the reverse transformation, if you did not return the car within three days after its arrival to the station, or to your organization, then it's classified as ‘rolling stock delay' for which there was stipulated a large fine which got larger with each further day of the delay. 

The addressee organization of the icicled sand lost their head – the problem seemed really unsolvable.
And who is to solve unsolvable problems?
True again! The construction battalion.
So they brought three trucks of us to the station.

And this time we were given smooth breakers.
To solve the problem through the opened hatches was impossible: strikes at the monolith from below sent the breakers back at you with the tantamount force.
Let's try to fuck it from the top and go down along the car sides with the shovels. 
By rumors, they were even going to bring perforators yet for now – to attack with what’s in hands!

I tried for a while and gave it up – over the years of my service I got too fed up with the fucking monotony of the process. 
However, idle kicking back around was too cold.

Misha Khmelnitsky gave me money to go after ‘warming stuff’.
He himself couldn't do it, he was a sergeant in charge of the Uzbeks. 

And where do them folks manage to get money from?
Nothing could be simpler.
MCU turned out mortar of different kinds in the quantities scribbled in the application orders brought by the truck drivers.
And if there was no signed order?
Then the driver gave another piece of paper.
To whom?
To the Commander of the squad-team working at the MCU...

I went to the city.
Unfamiliar with the area, I found the right store not at once.
There I  loaded the bottles under my pea jacket girded with the belt and became so stout.
Who had ever said they poorly fed the construction battalion?
I went back with my head kept down not from shame just because of the snow lashing my face.
‘Why don’t you salute? Haven’t you been taught?’
By the inner service statute, you must salute every senior in rank be it even just a lance corporal. 
But, in fact, I hadn't seen the one who stopped me and then if I threw my hand to my hat in salute the bottles under the pea jacket would play jingle bells. 

‘My fault, Comrade...’
I looked at his shoulder strap and could not make it out – no stripes, like in ensign's one, but the star much bigger and bigger even than in Major's, but than I saw leaves in his collar patches. 
‘...Comrade Major-General, I had got lost in thought.’
‘He lost in thought! Dismissed!’
And that was right – a general and a private in black shoulder straps had, practically, no common gossips. 
The only officer who addressed me with the plural ‘You’ in two years...

In place of a Siberian Captain Cherhykh, the Commander of the Fourth Company became another Captain transferred from the Mongolian steppes.
He was very amiable and had an exceptionally long nose touching his smiling upper lip. 

When on duty he did not sit in the Commander office but walked around the barracks boasting about the money certificates he had brought from Mongolia and starting small wrestling matches with soldiers. 
And after those matches, he became so happily agitated. 
His eyes began to shine, a red blush crept over his cheeks and his nose began touching his both lips. 

I couldn’t get it at once – something familiar flickered in his grimaces, intonations but what exactly I could not…
Got it!
The boy from Nalchik!
But then, well, that's an officer… 
And he had a wife…

In general, I dubbed him after the name of the Mongolian currency and the handle took root at once among the soldiers of the company.

So Tughrik, at an evening check, once again got into how rich he was with all those certificates and the following he would go with his wife to buy a new refrigerator and a new wristwatch as well because the wristwatch he had was just a shame and had to be thrown away regardless of their name: ‘Commander's'. 
I could not stand it any longer and said:
‘If you don’t want to throw it away then give it to some soldier.’
To which, he immediately called out: 
‘Who said that?! Two steps out of the ranks!’
I stepped out.
He approached me and in a demonstrative way unfastened the watch strap.
‘Here you are!’
I took it and put into my pocket, although he certainly awaited a different outcome.

But the next day I had the hell of trouble with that watch.
Half a day I walked the streets attempting to sell it and no one agreed to buy.
They thought if a watch was proposed by a conbatist then it should have been stolen or cut off from a cold body.
And a good watch it was, my father for such a one paid 25 rubles in Moscow and I priced it only 7.
For the first time, I was not jackalling and proposed a square deal. 
Commerce is a dead thing if there is no demand.

In the end, I took it to a watchmaker's shop, and the master there suggested three rubles and I agreed. 

I stepped out of the workshop with the honestly earned money just to be confronted by a drunk:
‘Hey, soldier! Buy a watch from me! I'll give it for just three rubles!' 

That’s a coincidence for you!
But those drunks got really brazen, ready to even mess around with conbatists...

A week later, Vanya told me that recently a 'young' cook was sleeping in the workshop of the stoker-house. 
Tughrik was the on-duty officer that day and stuck his long nose even to the stoker-house.
Seeing a 'young' spread on a mattress thrown over the workbench he clawed his dick: 
‘Gimme! Gimme it! ‘ 
And Vanya concluded that Tughrik was already sucking two ‘young' cooks with one of them fucking his wife... 

In the barracks he one time tried to run me over,
‘Seems like you think you are so great a ‘grandpa’, eh?’
I did not say anything.
Not a word.
I just protruded my lips to issued three tiny sounds:
‘Chmo-suck, chmo-suck, chmo-suck!' 
He mutely turned around and walked away with a rigid back.
Since then, he stopped to notice me.
I was such a rascal.
“A naasty raascal!”

A newcomer appeared in the company.
He was transferred from another construction battalion somewhere in Dagestan.
There he went AWOL and caught his wife at cheating him with another man.
He tried to raise a dust but got tied up and when in the clink, he promised so convincingly to bump off everyone involved as well as himself for a dessert that they transferred him to us – the remotest point in the Caucasus. 
And he was of Caucasian origin too.
I can’t be more exact, in Dagestan alone there are some 48 Caucasian nationalities.

He did not talk to anyone and no one talked to him. 
Because of fear maybe, like of a new beast in the familiar cage.

One evening he sat on a stool in the aisle of the company’s barracks with a newspaper in his hands.
I was passing by and some headline attracted my attention.
I mean this, all I wanted was just to have a look and give it back.
But he replied:
‘Fuck off!’
‘What?! Thief-swaggering, salaga?’
He jumped up to his feet.
And I never had a chance to reach him.
A whole pack flew in to kick up a blizzard.
He broke away and ran out of the barracks.
What’s characteristic – no ‘grandpa’ was in that pack, just only ‘dippers’.

Later I figured out that they were so pissed because of his making them fear him for several days. 
They were scared of his being not like them. 
No ethnic grounds though, just because of his family tragedy he harbored a danger of bumping you off and fuck the quadrangle of the circle.
Any pack is cemented by fear.

And he ran away as far as the Stuff barracks, he did not have the nerve to make for his native Dagestan. 
An on-duty officer came from there and led me to the clink.

In the clink, there already was a Dnepropetrovsk buddy kicking back around.
He had a really nice grass and we went on high.
Then we lay upon the plank decking with make-belief mattresses of some padded jackets and he started to flow on, to the tune that the whole of our great power had long been under the control of the secret network of a shadow organization with a branched structure of interaction and we all were moving towards one great goal, regardless of whether we realized that or not... 
In general, kinda profound briefing delivered by a Knight Templar from Dnepropetrovsk.
But if you were such a fucking Frank Mason would they rake you up to a construction battalion? 
But I did not interfere with his structural analysis because the grass was his.

Then the door opened shedding some light from the corridor and letting a Gingerbread Man of Tartar origin roll in. 
Wow! Who’s that so funny and round?
Alimosha! What’s brought you here, bro?

On the arrival of his truck to the gate, the on-duty officer suspected him of being in a state of intoxication. 
He even intended to search Alimosha for the purpose of detecting an attempt to smuggle alcohol.
Then Alimosha started to knock himself on the chest, he unbuttoned his pea jacket and flung it open to demonstrate what an honest serviceman he was and the smell on his breath resulted from Zhiguli beer which he had accidentally drunk thinking it was lemonade in the bottle because of it was dark there! 
In that unbuttoned state, he was brought to join our clink conference. 

About five minutes later Alimosha knocked on the door and asked an on-duty ‘dipper' if the stars was still around. 
Gone to the Stuff barracks.
Then Alimosha took a bottle of wine from the sleeve of his pea jacket and ordered to take it to Vitya Novikov in the First Company because the buddies there were already waiting for it.
The on-duty ‘dipper' locked us again to run the errand. 
Then Alimosha took the second bottle from the second sleeve and remained without firm biceps, and then, falling into the classic grove: 

‘The warriors remembered the days of their youth,
The battles they fought in by each other’s side...’

In the morning all three of us were, of course, released – somebody had to fulfill the current five-year plan drawn by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
And the Caucasian with his threats of killing himself after a spree of murders in his native Dagestan was transferred to the Separate Company...

I had already seen that Uzbek in the Canteen and remembered as it was because of him I stumbled across the idea that one can get stoned even without grass altogether just by hitching his wagon to the wake of other guys’ drag.
That time we went to the Canteen after the lights out.
The ’youngs’ with a fatigue ‘on the floors’ had already started cleaning the hall.
We chose the table in the corner and sat down without bothering anyone – they still had wide swaths to wash before reaching the corner.
The joint circumnavigated in a good-mannered style and the drag took a laughing turn – we looked at each other's mugs and were wetting our pants with laughter. 

That Uzbek was dragging his soaked rag to-and-fro in some five-seven meters off us and suddenly joined the company with his snicker.
In short, watching our mirth he got recharged and dragged the same way – in our wake, without grass. 
We called him to the table and offered the heel, but he refused.
Well, it’s clear too,  the roughed ‘young’ feared that the on-duty piece of shit from his company could drop in to see what’s how around there.

And then I saw the same Uzbek again, he was going with the MCU squad-team in one truck-back with me. 
And at times, when on the road, he sang songs in their own language and following their Central Asian modal-tonal harmony. 
Not something you’re accustomed to but listenable on the whole.
Like Jimmy Hendrix without a guitar.
The other Uzbeks got perked up and the road ended more quickly.
Good fellow ‘akyn’, or maybe ‘ashugh’?
Well, in short – labooh.

Sergeant Misha Khmelnitsky couldn't pronounce his name in any way and in the end, said: 
‘Okay! You will be Vasya!’

One time we were riding home and Khmel said:
‘Vasya! Sing up!’
I saw that the Uzbek was in no mood, reluctant, but Khmel did not shut up:
‘What? Can’t get it, salabon? Ordered – sing!’

Well, the labooh started a song.
The rest of the Uzbeks looked at him like angry dogs and scolded in their language, like, you bitch, are you a canary for this motherfucker?
I did not know the language but it was easy to guess.

The labooh after one verse made the coda.
But Khmel clung again:
‘Sing more, Vasya!’
And the soldier started again on high notes.
I saw the Uzbeks faces blossomed up in one place they even laughed.
Well, the singer clearly adopted his song to the situation:

‘Vai, sergeant, vai, I have fucked your Mom!.' 

But Khmel didn’t get it at all:

‘That’s it! Well done! More!’

And he got what he was asking for: 

‘Vai, sergeant, vai, I have fucked your fucking mouth!.’
 
The Uzbeks were rocking with laughter and the sergeant liked it too: 
‘Very well, Vasya!’

At that moment the truck pulled up at the traffic lights and I, without a superfluous goodbye to the nice company of music lovers, slipped over the back side and down the short ladder. 

And I slipped away to the quiet mouse.
Actually, her name was Tanya, but to myself, I called her ‘Quiet Mouse'. 
A blonde.
When I first approached her in a trolleybus she was answering so quietly. 

And could I not approach?
For several times she was going in the same trolley on which I went from the Ring Road to the MCU.
She told me later,
‘I noticed you still in February. At the very frosts, your pea jacket collar was wide open with the whole your neck sticking out.' 

‘… we always choose those very women, 
who have already chosen us ...’

That morning, when she agreed to date the same day evening by the Ring Road I was not alone going to the MCU by a trolley.
From our stop, we had still to stomp on along a lane and I said to that Moldovan: 
‘Rahroo! Would you bet I undress now?’
In general, there was snow all around, although it was March already, and I stripped to the waist strolling along in just boots and the canvas pants with Rahroo carrying my pea jacket with hat, and jacket and shirt behind.
Because of I had got such a fit of delight.
But that was before her telling me about my stuck out neck.

Most likely, my topless walk resulted from the meeting a god’s fool.
Back in February, I was hanging out for a week at the 50-apartment block of flats – that same that we had started with rebar breakers, it was already moving towards the delivery. 
And buddies from a squad-team there told me about some old man walking barefoot in one nearby street.

I had gone there twice on purpose before I met him.
It was an old bearded man.
The beard was white and slightly yellowish and the man had also a hat and an overcoat on.
His pants were rolled up leaving his legs bare from knees to feet.
He swept a path in the snow drifts with a besom.
Skinny and long, but hardly a drug addict because he had a drag of his own.
The snow was falling in big rare flakes and he walked barefoot and swept an empty path in the empty street.
I stood by for a while looking at him and he gave me a sidelong glance busy with his business. 
We both kept silent.
And then I left.

(...everyone believes that they are right and that their way of believing is the rightest one.

In Stavropol mujiks, the faith, for some reason, is firmly connected with their feet. 
Already in the third millennium, they showed a man on TV who had crawled on his knees from Stavropol to Moscow. 
To withstand the trying deed, he fixed pieces of automobile tires on his knees and crawled on replacing the tires as needed. 

For the revival of faith in the Christ-loving people of Russia and to bring God’s blessing to them.

Well, I, personally, don’t mind.
My present confession is that of tolerant unbelieving.
I entertain a strong belief that true tolerance happens exclusively among unbelievers.
All the rest are only pretending it but in fact, they want to convert everyone else into a follower of their faith. 
Even the atheists are a confession like others all too happy to convert you and enlarge their congregation of believers in absence of god.

An unbeliever is the one who has nothing to believe with, because of absence a corresponding organ with believing functions.

‘… the doctor said, ‘we’ll just remove the odd appendix...’

but being over-blind he chopped off what you needed for believing… 

So crawl as far as you please, sit in the lotus until you bloom, knead the floor with your forehead—whatever!—if not in my kitchen garden, of course. 
Don’t disturb my tolerance, please…)

But at the construction battalion that spring I did not care a damn about any theology when awaiting for the trolleybus number five by the Ring Road.
Several of them passed by until Tanya arrived.
We quietly walked along the sidewalk by the host of five-story blocks laid of white silicate brick in the Lipetsk masonry fashion.
Then we entered one of the staircase entrances in one of the five-story blocks.
We embraced warmly and quietly by the heating battery on the first floor at the bottom of the staircase. 
Still standing, we quietly coupled.
Then we went out again to the endless sidewalk and I escorted her to another entrance in another five-story block...

Then for a long time, it was not possible to repeat the warmly quiet pleasure. 
The staircase entrances for some reason became too crowded. 
A couple of times we went to the movies for daytime shows but there were too many kids around.
One time Captain Pissak spotted me leaving a cinema with her.
He called me aside and called for an immediate end to all sorts of relations with her, although he could not present any sound foundations for such a demand.
And that was annoying – Okay, suppose, you’re Pissak, then go and command in your First Company and I had Tughrik to report to.

But then I finally visit her at home.
It turned out, she lived in a different entrance from that where I escorted her that first time, and the building was half a block further on the sidewalk. 
When I took my boots off in the hallway and stuck the footcloths in them as deep as I could so that they wouldn't propagate their smell too freely, it turned out that I was barefoot and even slippers did not hide that fact – like a god's fool only without a besom. 

At home, she had a mother and a daughter of three years old. 
Then her mother took her daughter for a walk to a store and we sat on the carpet and she opened her album with photos.
Both in the album photos and on the carpet she was very cute that quiet mouse blonde Tanya. 
I had only to reach out and put my hand on her shoulder inside her home gown to have it on the carpet next to the album, but I could not.
I did not know what exactly, but something stopped me from moving the most natural way. 

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my misfortunes or joys, ups, and downs, all my pleasures, and deprivations sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you  lying in a tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lap of the river named Varanda…) 

Then her mother returned from the store together with her daughter and a mesh-bag of bright oranges.

Our following meetings took place outside her apartment and she started to show interest in looking at my military ID.
The sham about my ID locked up in the Commanders safe did not work – she was two years older than me.

Then there cropped up some nagging predicaments and confusions in the peaceful flow of my service, I got in a scrape or two and we lost sight of each other.
Already before the demobilization I again went to her, but her mother said she was not home.
I waited for her at the entrance to the staircase. 
We went out to a wide night courtyard between the five-story buildings and she quietly succumbed in the natural way on the table in the playgrounds. 
However, I cum too soon, much faster than in that entrance.
I did not like that and I broke off relations with her, in conformance with the wish of Pissak, the Commander of First Company.
Because, as it's written in the statute of inner military service "an order of the commander is the law for a lower ranked serviceman"...

The closer the demobilization, the shorter is your sleep.
Where had you retired, the blissful times when I, as a salaga, fell asleep the moment my head touched the pillow? 
But now?
The evening check was over, the long aimless visit to the Club paid, again I plodded back to the barracks without any hope of going to sleep.

So we got together, the nighthawks of the same feather, we lay upon bunk beds in one or another koobrik, we gossiped of this, we gossiped of that, or just drove a fool. 

(… many years later I learned from Solzhenitsyn's ‘Archipelago' that it was an old customary pastime among zeks, inherited from the tsarist times when someone in the cell retold some novel by some Dickens with adaptations and retouch of the details to bring them closer to the contemporary everyday life. 
Only instead of ‘driving a fool’ zeks called it ‘stamping a novel’…)

When it was my turn I stamped a novel of revenge about two young lovers and a cruel baron from the nearby castle.
The vicious brute of a baron imprisoned the young man in the dark dungeon cell and was methodically using his beloved as a sex slave right in front of the poor guy.
A month later the prisoner broke the peg fixing his chain to the wall and paid the bills for lodging and warm hospitality.

(...the plot had nothing to do with Dickens though, when driving a fool I, with my closed eyes, saw the translucent blouse of Michelle Mercier from the first sequel of ‘Angelica’.
But here the question arises: if I farmed out my Michelle to the baron to use her (for a whole month!) along his senile fantasies in turn with his wolfhound and various objects of medieval utensils and implements, albeit jerking at the peg in attempts to pull it from the wall, but still collaborationistically keeping time with what was happening, then, may it be I’m a pervert?
Of course, the question would be risen not by the listeners but by myself and not then but much later, but still and yet…) 

During the disassembling of the baron conducted in the most savage manner, Khmel suddenly hollered:
‘Hey, on-duty!’
From the cabinet-box by the faraway entrance to the barracks, the on-duty came and Khmel told him: 
‘He had already fucked everybody with his snoring. Dome the fucker, let him RIP.’
‘Who?’
‘In the koobrik over two passages.’
The on-duty bent over the peace disturber and listened to the sleepy breathing: 
‘No, not this one.’
Lyolik joined in the conversation:
‘Who the fuck cares? Dome the fucker all the same.’

(...the depth of philosophical wisdom of the utterance still brings the tears of tender delight to my eyes. 

‘Who the fuck cares? Dome the fucker all the same.’

Here it is – the quintessence of statuary and other service relations, the pledge of combat well-trainedness, readiness, and capability of the army… 
I would like to say of ‘the Soviet army’, the one that’s gone into oblivion… 
But who nowadays believes in Father Christmas?..)

A dembel-soldier pines away under a constant tension.
A state of incomprehensible, groundless anxiety deprives him of sleep, appetite, the ability to assess his actions with requirements of elementary logic. 
Every morning the buddies from your draft are lined up in groups facing the ranks of the Morning Dispensing and, after a brief farewell from Zampolit, or Chief of Staff, they go to the gate by the checkpoint, go to the demobilization, go home.
And when’s my turn?!

After kicking around to three o’clock at the location of VSO-11, I sat in the cabin of UAZ truck used for bringing bread from Stavropol.
Under the canvas top of the truck back climbed Lyolik and some of his buddies also going AWOL.
We left through the gate and sped towards the city along the asphalt road wet after the recent thunderstorm. 

The asphalt along the road edges was all ruts and holes so the white car that jumped out of the turn was darting over the middle.
The UAZ driver dodged, leaping with the right wheels onto the muddy roadside.
The turn was rushing at him – he turned the rudder wheel to the left and hit the brakes.
The UAZ jumped back onto the road and skidded along in a free-style gliding. 
The driver by my side was frantically spinning the wheel in all directions.
The truck was speedily crabbing along changing the sides at his will, paying no attention to what the driver did to the wheel.
In the end, we were turned in the opposite direction and, after traveling backward for some time, the truck capsized. 
The embankment was not too high—about two meters—so we turned upside down no more than two times.

Some strange sensation when you are in the cab of a truck tumbling under the slope.
It’s like you were a fish in a bowl.
Probably, that is weightlessness.
The driver, the rudder, the door, the driver again hovering by are floating past you…
I landed on him.
The truck lay on its side.
But the driver was the first to climb out through the window overhead.
I followed him.
The buddies from the truck back were already standing by the driver.
Lucky guys.
On the road the Battalion Commander’s ‘goat’-Willis squeaked with brakes.
Without waiting for the continuation, I entered the green foliage of the forest edge. 
‘Who else was that?’
‘I dunno, someone from the Separate Company asked for a ride…' 

After two kilometers the forest was over, as well as the tense tremor in my hands, and I entered the city. 
I went to a cinema to take off the adrenaline.
It was ‘How to Steal Million’ with Peter O’Toole.
Or was it ‘Remarriage’ with Belmondo?
No!
After Belmondo, I met Nadya. 
A student of something there.
We walked for a long time, I intermittently hugged her, but when I started kissing she bit my tongue. 
‘I know what you’re hinting at!’
What a fool!
What hints were there? 
It hurt so, I could hardly speak.

I saw her to a one-story house where she rented an apartment.
She went in and brought out a can of condensed milk.
Sort of a consolation prize to a wounded warrior.
I hugged her for a goodbye but shunt kissing.

Left alone, I looked at the can in my hand then at the wall of the house.
No sticking out nail could be seen there.
Putting the can on the railing I left.
Not for my bitten tongue...

Only four dembels remained in the construction battalion – I, Gray, Red from Dnepropetrovsk, and Sasha Roodko.
I had already got myself a parade-crap – borrowed from a ‘pheasant’.
Because of transferring me to the Fourth Company as a stoker, after one year of service, I missed getting a parade-crap both in the First and in the Fourth Companies. 

In the morning before the Dispensing there started up a round-dance by the sorteer.
The eager on-lookers hasting to the entertainment informed that the night before Gray made a ‘young' auto crane driver take him from a site to the battalion and reaching the Separate Company changed him at the rudder and crashed into a pole. 
Nothing terrible happened, the auto crane was not even in need of repair. 
However, the Chief of Staff when learning all that in the morning got furious and started the scrap with Gray.
YOU FACKER!
What swing! What a hook!
The major put the whole weight of his body into the punch and… missed.
Gray had dodged.
Hmm… Boo, major!
And I had always thought you were a boxer…
The soldiers helped the Chief of Staff to get back on his feet.
The on-duties escorted beltless Gray to the clink... 

At the Morning Dispensing Zampolit announced that Red was going to demobilization and Roodko and I the following day as well.
‘Comrade Zampolit, I need a testimonial.’
‘What testimonial?’
‘For admission to the institute.’
‘You, Ogoltsoff, are an absolute, fuck it, son of a bitch! Are you fucking sane? An alcoholic, a druggie, a gangsta!
I’ll give you such a testimonial that no zone will accept you but the jug for lifers!
It’s our fault before the society that you get out of here at all.
But the society will deal with you, will mill you and crumble into a fine powder!' 

The three of us were paid money at the Staff barracks.
Wow! So I had some earnings!
One hundred and twenty rubles for two years of honest work. 

Roodko and I went to see Red off and equip ourselves at the same go.

In the city, Roodko bought himself a sports bag for traveling home, and I chose a ‘diplomat'-case – they were just getting a vogue. 
Its black plastic interior received into custody the dembel stuff: pantyhose for Olga in transparent cellophane, a bottle of vodka for me and my father and a crimson silk tablecloth with a fringe for 7 rubles 50 kopecks which Red had bought for his mother and asked me to keep in the ‘diplomat’ while we were sprinkling down the dust on his way home.
I also put there the kicks – light and practical, made of black corduroy for just six-fifty because in the battalion I couldn’t find shoes for the parade-crap I wore and those in which I entered the city were borrowed from the Third Company storeroom for just a day.
After the Red's way was sprinkled properly and we with noisy goodbyes came near the stop of buses going to the station I was not drunk and clearly remembered about that crimson silk tablecloth in my ‘diplomat’.
I did not remind Red of the gift he had bought for his mother.
I stole it.
At some point, giving me one last chance, he turned a sober look at me – would I tell him?
But I kept silent.
He drunkenly dropped his head and walked to the bus.
I watched the distance growing between us on the sunlit sidewalk – ten meters, twenty… 
But I never called out:
‘Red! You forgot, bro!’

(… and no bastard from the banks of Varanda will ever be of help to redress that…)

At the next Morning Dispensing, Roodko and I stood facing the ranks and the Chief of Stuff announced that we were going to the demobilization.
We made turn ‘to left!' – I, with my black ‘diplomat, and Roodko, with his blue sports bag. 

After a couple of steps, the Battalion Commander spotted the corduroy kicks on me, heading to the gate behind which the society lurked in ambush making ready to grind me down to powder at the nearest convenient moment. 
The Battalion Commander made the last desperate attempt to save the doomed:
‘What the fuck?! See the fucking shit on the son of a bitch!' 
‘Let him fucking get away!’ said the Chief of Staff. ‘The fucker has already fucked here all off fucking limits!’
Good-bye and you, Fathers-Commanders…

But even 24 hours later I was still in Stavropol.
At the city airport with its rustic looks.
Just serving ‘as it’s necessary’ was not enough, it was necessary to manage to return home.

I had a flight ticket to Kiev bought from the city Aeroflot office, but when I arrived at the kolkhoz field of an airport the flight was delayed for an hour, then for another hour and only by noon the piston-plane AN-24 ran along the takeoff strip and beneath the wing of the aircraft, under the hum of motors, floated rarefied clouds and topographic landscapes.

The conbat remained in the past but I still stayed in the Construction Battalion and was thinking about the First Company master sergeant who clung to me in a city bus last week.
And the main thing, did he really need it? 
He was in a civilian outfit.
Because of he was drunk decided to show off what an important piece of shit he was, that’s why.
‘What are you doing here? Go to the barracks at once. I’ll report to the Battalion Commander at the Morning Dispensing!’
‘And I’ll say you were drunk like a pig.’
No one said anything to anyone.

And that major also was in civilian.
How could I know?
‘I’m a major!’ hollered he. ‘How dare you?’
Who’d guess you were a major when you’re in civilian rags?
Look at me – all’s clear.
The shoulder strap clear of any crap means clear conscience – a rank-and-file construction battalion!
It’s because of that barmaid in the cafe that we had a scrape.
She was a good sort and more inclined to me at first before he flashed his rank trump. 
Maybe a bluff?
No, you can’t deceive such a woman.

I still belong to the Construction Battalion.
Forever.
I still carry somewhat of it in myself.
To the end.

But I did not think of anything like that then. 
I was just a dembel flying home.
Not home meaning ‘barracks’, but home meaning ‘home’.

Although my mother wrote to me in her letter that they had sold the hatta and bought half of a house further on in the Settlement.
No fear, I got the address, I would find it.

But I couldn’t think about Konotop for long, I had used to thinking about other things and I thought usual thoughts.
As we took the drummer from Pyatigorsk to the military flight school to show that he was really good.

There went three of us – Long, the drummer and I.
We wanted the cadets from the vocal-instrumental ensemble at the flight school saw for themselves that the drummer was a pro so that they would put a word to their zampolit to find him some position in the school's chmo because he had to be drafted to the army. 
Such was the idea.

The cadets were just rehearsing on stage.
The hall was like a summer cinema, without the roof.
They gave Long their guitar, the drummer sat behind the drums…
And they made a duet da bomb, a potpourri of Jimmy and Jimmy. 
Had let their souls have a flight… 
Poor fools!
They sort of run a bulldozer over those rosy cadets in the blue shoulder straps.
The cadets needed a drummer of the kind that follows the pioneer banner next to the bugler:
du-du-du-dú! du-du-du-dú!
Hardly they would ever mention to their zampolit about such Drummer.
Such well-groomed boys, them those cadets.
Well-fed too.

Was it all over?
No more evening checks?
Neither Zampolit, nor Chief of Staff, nor pieces…

I was flying home.
At home, everything would be nyshtyak! 
Not for nothing, I had been dreaming of it all those two years or, rather did not allow myself to think about home. 
That was my first flight in an airplane.
Better than crawling the whole two days by train.

My wrist hurt a bit.
That fool in the hotel last night.
She would give only there was nowhere to. 
Let’s go to your room said she.
I asked the mujiks in the room and they left.
So while she was showing how virgin she was and maimed my wrist with her fingernails they started to return – one by one.
The session’s over.
But I didn't strong-arm her, she just grabbed my hand and started her claw-work. 
That Stavropol was some breeding ground for sadist chicks, nothing more, nothing less. 
Maybe Olga would not notice.
But if she would then what?
You could get any kind of scars when on your combat duty.

The AN-24 landed in Rostov.
I went to the toilet near the takeoff field and on the way back a military patrol stopped me.
Right! Corduroy shoes were an utter breach of the inner military service statute, but I'm dembel flying home and the plane's already buzzing its propellers! 
They let me go.

Refueling in Kharkov and at last – there it was!
Brim-filled with the summer sun, the Boryspol airport.

On that first flight, I decided that it was already Kiev and going to the sunny square full of all kinds of transport and scurrying pedestrians, went straight to the big shield with the letter ‘T’ and two rows of chessboard cells – to take a taxi.

The taxi driver was a long-haired young mujik about the age of thirty.
I liked his good brown leather shoes with wide laces. 
I told him to go to the railway station and he asked me to wait in the car while he would look for fellow travelers. 
There were still forty-eight kilometers to Kiev.

He left and I remained to wait in the front seat. 
It was hot and I took off my parade-crap jacket and, in order to pass the time and smooth out the growing tension, I stuffed and smoked a joint.
The driver brought two passengers: a major and a lieutenant-colonel, but younger than our Battalion Commander, and we started off.

Maybe that driver in brown shoes got the scent of grass in the car and was carried away by his personal memories, but he drove like mad and after crossing the Dnieper over the Paton Bridge he completely dropped noticing the traffic lights. 
Or maybe it was a day-off for the traffic lights—a holiday of free driving—anyone overtaking whoever they wanted, however, they could. 


Paying at the station, the lieutenant-colonel said,
‘Well, chief, you’re flying indeed!’
So, most likely, the driver really got a drag on the wake.

In 1975, ‘diplomat’-cases were not seen too often and therefore attracted attention by their foreign appearance.
It would be forgivable for some senior officers, but I was stopped by a military patrol the moment I entered the Central Hall of the Kiev Railway Station.
And again, by the way, they were cadets but already in red shoulder straps.
They checked my military ID and the demobilization papers. 
Nothing to find fault with.

And then I made a mistake by looking at my shoes.
The patrol commander followed my glance down and saw a flagrant violation of the statutory uniform.
I was taken to the station military commandant office under the magnificent stairs which led to the giant marble statue of Lenin’s head on the landing half-way to the second floor.

The on-duty officer at the commandant office told me to open the ‘diplomat’ and at a glance realized that I was a dembel: pantyhose, a bottle of vodka and the stolen tablecloth with fringe.
‘Go,’ said he. ‘Come back in uniform shoes and you'll get your case.’

I rushed to the huge ticket-offices hall on the left.
There was a long line at the ticket office of the Moscow direction.
In the line, some thirty meters from the ticket-office I made out a soldier in a parade-crap.
He was a big man, which meant his feet were not small and he looked sad so (that’s elementary) he was returning after his leave to serve another year.
‘Where are you going?’
‘To Moscow.’
‘Come on.’
I led him straight to the window of the ticket office and explained to the line, suddenly grown so clamorous,  that we had an urgent order to protect their peace and sleep on the remote borders of our Homeland. 
He took a ticket to Moscow and I for me to Konotop.
When we moved away I described to him the situation with the case.

A ‘pheasant’ cannot say ‘no’ to a dembel.
We sat on one of the many benches in the Waiting Hall and exchanged shoes.

‘Where could you manage so fast?’ asked the on-duty officer at the commandant office.
‘Bought from a gypsy on the platform.’

With the case set free, I hurried to the Waiting Hall where the sad holidaymaker hid his feet in statute violating shoes deeper under the bench.
I sat down next to him, but we did not have time to change – the loudspeakers announced that the train to Moscow was going to start off the sixth platform and we ran there not to be late.

The laces on the borrowed shoes got loose and lashed the floor on the run, but we got in time.

The train hastily knocked along the rails, it was carrying me to Konotop but my uptightness did not subside; I drove the train to go faster and found no place for myself.

Only late at night getting off the train on the platform 4 of the Konotop Station I believed that that’s it.

‘As the soldier's come home
After his service's done...’

And I again rode the same tram number three, but already right to the very terminal of its route.
The darkness outside the window made the pane-glass reflect vaguely the khaki jacket and the forage cap of the soldier parade-crap.
At the terminal, I asked where the Decemberists Street was and they told me to go that way. 
Long fences. 
Huttas behind their wickets. 
Rare lampposts.
Unfamiliar outskirts. 
Having asked someone else along the way, I went out onto the Decemberists Street and walked along it until I reached the wicket with the plate hardly discernible in the dark.
Number 13.
I entered the yard and knocked on the first door of the hutta.
It opened.
Is that my father so gray-haired? When?
In the light falling from the open door, he looked incredulously at my parade-crap. 
‘Sehrguey?’
He turned to the inner house.
‘Galya! Sehrguey has come!’

My mother strode out onto the porch and buried her head in the breast of the parade-crap jacket with loud tears. 
I awkwardly patted her shoulder.
‘Well, Mom, calm down, I’m back after all.’
I really did not know what there was to cry about.

(...it’s only now I realize that she was crying about herself, about her flashed life.
Just recently she’s been scampering to the ballet school with her girlfriends and—here you are!—a man in the parade-crap in front of her, like, the son from the army came back.
When?..)

She looked back at the small frightened girl standing by the kitchen table and, finishing the last sob, said:
‘What do you fear, silly? It’s your dad who’s come.’
Then she turned back to me:
‘How come you did not meet Olga? She went to the third shift. She works at the brick factory.’

...service's done...




