~~~ Defying the Wash ~~~ 

The landlady liked to quote her deceased spouse and often boozed with her veteran friends, not in the kitchen, because of the tenant, but behind the curtains in her room doorway. 
I was sitting in my room and did not intervene with anything – you can’t forbid them living their life in a style.

My connection with 13 Decemberists was not broken up completely. 
I had asked my father to manufacture at RepBase some spare parts to assemble a wardrobe in my room.
He produced a prop and two thin tubes by my drawing; my mother sewed the needed piece of burlap and it turned out a fabric-walled wardrobe in the corner, as it was once in the hallway on the Object.
However, since then the advanced technologies paced far ahead, I covered it with a light thick foam plate of those used for heat isolation finishing of the railway cars at the KaPeVeRrZe Plant.

My room seemed too squalid for a safe house and no conspirators showed up.
I started to consider it a monk-hermitage cell and I liked its look, especially the black and white bark of the birch walling the window; sometimes, tired of translations, I just sat and looked at it.

When I settled down, my mother came to a visit escorted by my father.
In the kitchen, my former and my current landladies measured each other with irreconcilable glances and exchanged official nods.
Then my parents stood sighing under the bare bulb hanging from the ceiling on its dust-blackened wire.
To all their questions I was giving polite, though monosyllabic answers and they left because the one and only chair in the room was not stimulating longer stay.

At the beginning of autumn, in the middle of the week, Eera came from Nezhin. 
She found our construction site in the At-Seven-Winds, I changed in the trailer and we went to the city.
I always liked her romantically wide cloak below the knees.

We went to visit Lyalka.
His wife, Valentina, was relieved to learn that by us everything was fine.

A couple of times, when I and Eera had a quarrel, she used to come then to Konotop and ask Valentina to call me from the Settlement.
The Decemberists street was a long way from the Peace Square.
And so, with Valentina’s mediation, Eera and I were reconciling on the sofa covered with a hard carpet in the living room of Valentina and Lyalka’s place.

Actually, you could hardly call them ‘quarrels’, it’s just that sometimes Eera was in the mood for yelling.
Because of I was so ugly to look at.
That was after we went out to watch some sort of a comedy with a gay tinge by the Mosfilm.
Or that no one would ever be interested in those translations of mine...

But real quarreling between us did not work.
Despite my tongue-tiedness, I somehow managed to convince her that such yells were not a role for us, why to repeat other people's clues? 
It sounds so stupidly, but I myself understood what I meant but could not express.

It happened only once that I misbehaved.
That time I brought my payment from the SMP-615 and put it on the table under the pier-mirror.
Eera asked how much was there and then started yelling that was not money.
She did not need such alms!
Then I grabbed that skinny pile and tore it in two before throwing out of the window.

While Eera was away out in the yard I did not know what to do and only was cursing my lack of restraint. 
In my next visit Eera somewhat shyly explained that the bank could accept glued bills.

(...and that's correct because banks also need money and 70 rubles are not scattered in your path, except when you are going under a window on the first floor, but even then in a torn condition…) 

What I was personally surprised with during that particular development, it's the poor quality of paper used for printing money. 
Say, if you cut some funny money of newspaper—the same number of bills—it would be harder to tear it up that my payment.
It literally went in two of its own will in my hands…

Then we visited the new Culture House of KaPeVeRrZe Plant built next to the Bazaar.
They say the construction cost amounted to six million rubles.
The Loony director, Bohmstein, moved over there to the same position.
There was a ballroom with a bar on the second floor.

When we came to my apartment, Praskovya was just driving out her orgy of alcoholic widows in the neighborhood.
I introduced her and Eera to each other in the kitchen.

The landlady carefully examined her and, in my opinion, she also like Eera’s raincoat.
She even kissed her suddenly and then me too, on the spur of the moment, and went to sleep behind her curtains.
Eera even made a small grimace of misunderstanding, however, did not dare to resist, as for me, I did not care at all.

One time Eera and I were going by a local train and some gay from the opposite seat started to make overtures to me.
Eera simply flew in a temper.
She even started bickering with him.
But it’s just funny because I’m indifferent to them.
Sasha Chalov’s daddy was kissing me on the cheek, and now it’s tipsy Praskovya.
Who cares?

But in my entire life I have never felt a more sweet, lustfully tender and, at the same time, so eagerly clinging and tight-fitting vagina than that night; even with Eera, I had that for the first and last time. 
What became the decisive factor?
The interior of a monastery cell, or the double kiss from Praskovya Khvost?

(...there is still a whole lot of questions that I won’t find answers to. 
Never…)

Later in the autumn, I was sent to work in the Vorozhba station, where the construction of the three-story Communication House was underway. 
The walls and the roof were already in place and my responsibility was laying the partitions.
There I once again got a proof that the body of a human being is much smarter than he himself.

At both ends of the building, there were inside staircases, one of them completed and the other not yet. 
I was going upstairs for the first time and did not know that between the second and third floors the steps had not yet been laid.
Only the pair of channels for eventual placing steps was rising to the landing between the two floors.
I was lazy and decided to climb up the channel by the wall, its width of 10 cm seemed enough.
I turned sideways and, facing the wall made a couple of careful steps upward.

Then I discovered my mistake – the channel was placed too close to the wall and my center of gravity coincided with its face, deflecting from that vertical would, according to the laws of physics, send my body into a dive with the free fall acceleration onto the debris with insertions of crookedly sticking rebars deep in the basement. 
However, after the start I could not make the same two steps back, there was not room enough to turn even my face back, so high was located the center of gravity.
I clung to the red brick wall as if to something most dear to me and watched an unforgettable picture.

My hands turned into tiny octopuses.
Each finger lived its own life bending in all direction in the search for clefts between the bricks. 
With my hands enrooted in the wall, I pulled myself upward and then gently dragged my feet up the inclined channel. 

After many a repetition of that trick, we got out. 
But I’m still sure if the seams in the brick courses were filled properly with the mortar but not in the style of ‘off we drive!’ no unknown reserves of the human body would save me.
From the ensuing surge of adrenaline, I realized why cliffhangers love mountains so much, but I personally would not risk it.

In that winter they excavated all of the Professions street.
The rumors had it as if that was done for laying the sewer, but it looked like a long foundation pit for about a kilometer and four-five meters deep. 
In places, the dug canyon was crossed with a thick underground telephone cable that suddenly appeared hanging in the air across the pit, from one wall to the other. 
And deep down there a bulldozer was moving earth and the gravel brought by KAMAZes. 
Only along the concrete wall of the KaPeVeRrZe Plant there remained a meter-wide ledge with a path over all those hillocks of the piled soil. 

And I was walking along that trail with a plastic bag in my hand – up and down, up and down.
When I saw a schoolgirl ahead going in the same direction, then from the yellow and gray tartan of her coat I realized I should not go on. 
That was not my way.
Fortunately, the telephone cable was sagging nearby towards the opposite wall of the pit.
I stepped on it and went on without slowing down my pace.
I did not even mind there was the bag in my hand.
But after I passed a couple of meters the usual story happened again.
I started to doubt – was I really a tightrope walker to pace the cables?

(...because of the like doubting Simon, aka Stone, aka Peter, instead of having a leisurely walk over the water started to go down into it…) 

The cable fluttered and began to sway increasing the amplitude.
I waved my arms and fell down.

It's a good news that flying past, I managed to grab onto the cable with my hands. 
After pausing for a couple of seconds, I let go and, like a parachutist, jumped to the bottom of the pit.
There, I leaned over the face of a prostrate prostitute in a broad-brimmed hat with red lining.
She stared up past me.
How come the prostitute in the snow?
Why was I there?

It’s a pot shot about the prostitute, she fell out of the bag in the fall.
And it was right for me to be there – my way was finished on that cable, another one was starting from that depth…

And I went along the bottom of the pit to the far end of it with the ramp for KAMAZ truck to drive down and from there to the station square to be in time for our ‘seagull’ and go to work and in the end of the day to get off the ‘seagull’ by the bus station and buy a ticket and run, waving it, into the already starting bus:
‘I have a ticket! I have a ticket!’
Because Eera told me about her country trip to the Hare Pines to keep her fidelity to me despite the champagne in the glove box.
Because of what else did I have to do?
That’s why I went to Romny...

It was completely dark and cold in Romny, but I found a hotel.
The receptionist did not know where to accommodate a guest with a plastic bag in his hand, so she allotted me a four-bed room alone.
Although she could join me to that pair of business travelers that came from the same bus after me.

The room was a usual pencil-box for four, empty and freshly painted over the paint coats from the previous twenty renovations.
Four thick terry towels hung from the backs of the four beds and the radio on the wall was singing a thick bass romance about the cold morning, gray morning.
I had nothing to do.
I turned off the radio and the light.
I lay down and looked into the darkness until I fell asleep.

The morning, in contrary to the forecast from the romances, turned out to be sunny and bright and I quickly found the psychiatric hospital.
I left the plastic bag in a snowdrift on the lawn under a big tree and, without any luggage, entered the open gates keeping my hands visible. 

When the guards got it that I was not visited anyone but wanted to stay there myself, I was taken to a small office.

A young man who looked like a militia lieutenant, except for a white medical coat, asked about the reason for my coming.
‘I want a certificate that I am not crazy.’
I knew perfectly well that by those words I had burned down all the ships and blown up all the bridges behind me and now they would lock me up for sure.
‘And who says you were crazy?’
‘Well, in the tram, for instance.’

His animation grew exponentially.
He started inquiring what kind of a seal I wanted on the certificate – round, or triangle?
‘It does not matter as long as it’s signed.’
So he called a young doctor and an elderly nurse to take me to the shower and then to the fifth unit.

Before the shower, the nurse cut off the hair in my groin with a hairdresser’s hand-machine.
I felt embarrassed, but I did not resist – a strange monastery is not a place to declare your rules, as they say.

After the shower, the doctor took me to an interview.
In order to consolidate the success, I drove a couple of fools, she only moaned lustily while scribbling post-haste in a thick notebook. 

When we went out into the yard, I said that I had left a plastic bag outside the gates.
The nurse refused to believe, but then she went off and with amazement brought the bag.

(...and what was there to be surprised with?
Who’ll get the nerve to lift a bag left, like a bait, by the regional psychiatric hospital gate?..)

The doctor opened the bag and allowed me to keep it along with a copybook, a pen, and a book in English with a close-up of a woman in a hat on the cover.

The fifth unit of the Romny psychiatric hospital was located at the height of the third floor.
The construction was carried out by the blueprints of the Stalin times with the stair flights forming a stairwell.
Halfway up, there was an iron mesh across the well to surprise a suicide with a failure.

The stairs ended on the wide landing in front of the locked door with a pair of long wooden benches at the sides.

Behind the door, customarily, there started a corridor.
From a vertically grated window by the door with a tablet ‘Head Doctor', it went to the right to end, at a considerable distance, with a blind wall with a tap in it and a sink. 

In the long wall on either side of the corridor there gaped rectangular doorways to the wardrooms, which at first sight seemed caves due to the absence of doors. 
The light of the world outside reached the wardrooms through the window panes and the iron grates before finding its way to the corridor.
That’s why, in cloudy weather, the bulbs in the corridor were turned on.
They served rather emphasize than disperse the twilight. 

Halfway to the far-off end wall, one wardroom was missing, turned into a small hall with two barred windows.
In the corner next to the right window, a tall pier-mirror stood on top of its cabinet and in the returning to the corridor partition was a white door with the sign ‘manipulation room’.
The left window was blocked by a tall box with a turned off TV on it and a hospital couch under, put along the corridoripetal partition with another white door in the hall signed ‘senior nurse’.

The floor of the corridor was paved with middle-sized ceramic tiles of a brownish dark hue not violating the general gamma of the all-embracing twilight.
The floor gleamed moistly since the privileged patients washed it twice a day with wet cloths on wooden mops.

To check how dangerous I was, they placed me at first to the observation wardroom, opposite the hall with the mirror.
In the corridor, by the jamb of the door-less doorway to the wardroom, there stood an armchair with brown leatherette covering its nickel-plated carcass over four slender pipes of the legs. 
It was seated with an elderly but sturdy mujik—a paramedic—in a white coat and a small white capulet. 

With one of his ears turned to the observation wardroom, he kept his face parallel to the corridor with its rare passers-by in dark pajamas and another paramedic at another wardroom in the distance sitting in exactly same chair, yakking idly with a young man in pajamas and boots squatted in front of him with his arms hanged over his knees.

The paramedic took me into the wardroom chinking on the way his bunch of keys against the back of the first from the doorway bed with a blonde-haired guy in bright red pajamas staring in the ceiling while energetically beating off under the sheet. 
Out of the opposite corner burst a dramatically satanic laughter just to cut off immediately.
The paramedic pointed at the third bed from the window and I humbly lay down.

Between me and the window there lay a young man with the shaven head, tightly wrapped in a blue hospital coat and peering at the ceiling.
Soon he turned to me an attentive look from the bluish circles under his eyes and asked whether my brother’s name was Sasha and I had a sister too.

Then he squeezed his head between his hands and started to tell me that he had been studying with them at the technical school before one evening his father sent him to collect cows when the gray fog was drifting through Podlypnoye and left a cold to his hatless head which hurt ever since. 

He shooed one or two halfwits off when they were approaching the back of my bed with illegibly formulated questions.
Then he said that his name was also Sasha, turned away and fell asleep.

The wardroom-mates started to exact from the blond-haired singing a song and he with whining shouted one of the fresh hits:

‘Save, please, save, please, save, please, save my broken heart,
Find, please, find, please, find, please, find, find her, find...’

Two hours later, making sure that I was not a violent case, the senior nurse called me from the corridor and led to Wardroom 9, closer to the office with the tablet ‘Head Doctor’.
The 9th looked more comfortable with its just five beds.
Only the white table in the corner by entrance partly obstructed the way, but since there was no door that was a minor inconvenience. 
Jungle shrieks from neighboring wardrooms soon also grew habitual sounds and ceased to stir the attention up.

In the evening, in the corridor sounded a cry ‘to the kitchen!’ and a group of privileged patients led by a nurse went to the exit.
Half an hour later they returned and with a harried pace, precipitated by the weight of two boiler-thermoses, marched in the contrary direction.
A few minutes later from the distant end of the corridor they called:
‘Workmen to dinner!’

They always first called workmen to the dining room.
Instead of pajamas, the workmen wore black spetzovkas and after the breakfast and lunch, they were marched away somewhere. 

When the workmen left the dining room, in the corridor sounded the next call:
‘The second party, to dinner!’
And, after the needed period of time, they shouted the concluding call:
‘The third party, to dinner!’

At the distant end of the corridor, there were three locked doors in the left wall: to the shower, the dispenser, and the dining room. 
Neither of them had a tablet, but everyone knew where was what.

In the shower room stood tin pails and wooden mops for the floor washing.
Its door was opened by a nurse or a paramedic for the privileged to take the instruments for their pastime and locked again.
However, despite so close control one of the fifth unit patients managed to hang himself in the shower room.
Not at the first attempt, though.

Before the fifth unit feeding, they opened the dispenser room, to place the brought boiler-thermoses, and the dining room, to have where to call the eating parties to. 

The dispenser room was narrowed by the large shelving along the wall opposite the dispenser window.
The robust shelves bore plastic bags with food delivered to the patients by their visitors on the visiting day.
Twice a week, they shouted in the corridor:
‘Delivery! Who has a delivery? To the dining room!’
Those who knew there was a delivery from their relatives stored in the dispenser room, that is things they did not manage to eat at the meeting, went to the dining room to finish eating.

If someone could not keep in mind or did not want to remember the existence of a plastic bag on the shelves, their attentive wardroom-mates would remind him and even lead to the dining room to help in eating the delivery. 

I did not belong to the workmen and ate with the second party.
We lined up in a noisy, diversely dressed but equally hungry queue along the wall by the door blocked with a paramedic’s figure, while they were sweeping off the tables inside after the previous eaters.
The paramedic also controlled that someone would not get in the line after having been fed with a previous party.

At last, the paramedic said:
‘Come on!’
And we noisily poured through the unusually narrow door into the dining room with three windows and long tables, like in a medieval refectory only covered with oilcloth.
They stood in three rows from wall to wall and a narrow passage in the middle divided them into six separate tables.
We sat at them, overstepping the benches nailed to the floor. 

Amid the animated noise and uninhibited gesticulations, we waited for the constant on-duty blond masturbant to bring the wide plywood tray with aluminum bowls, spoons and bread. 
Those who got the havvage started to eat it and the others watched them and waited on while the chmo dispenser, also a patient, was filling the next tray behind his window.
We ate everything up and began to wait for a tray of tin cups filled with sour-sweet kissel whose skin I so much hated when a kindergarten kid.

Once I overslept the feeding and had to eat with the third party.
Some grievous sight.
There, people treated their faces as plasticine kneading out of it anything.
But I found out who produced baboon shrieks that I heard from my wardroom, and who answered him with the roar of a wounded elephant.
There were no desultory conversations at the third party feeding.

And yet at times, someone from the second party would mix into the third one. 
Not just of pure love for living nature, they had time to eat the neighbor's ration while he was making faces to the window grates. 

Sasha, who knew my brother Sasha, was favoring the third party and often ate with them in order to curb those halfwit but cunning freeloaders. 

Those three meals were the noisiest time of day in the fifth unit. 
If someone started to make too much noise at an unreasonable hour, a pair of paramedics ran to his wardroom and, following a rectifying hit or two with their bunch of keys on his head, fixed the troublemaker. 
That is, they crucified him lying, with his wrists and ankles tied to the iron corners along his bed spring mesh by means of cloth straps, obviously from the former worn-out bed-sheets.

After feeding, everyone dispersed to their wardrooms or strolled aimlessly along the brown tiles of the corridor floor.
I would not say that we were starving there – a havvage as anywhere else.
Once for a dinner, we were even given a pair of pancakes each. 
Though being cold, they had been smeared with a drop of some jam.

And quite separately stands the incomprehensible late night feast when two laundry basins appeared in the hall filled with sausage of two types: liver-squash and blood-mixture; and everyone could take as much as he wanted.
Except for a pair of the third party members, who suddenly grew sane enough, but the fat patient in charge of the basins drove them away. 
Discrimination happens anywhere...

But the main delight in the life of the fifth unit was being brought by the stately, flax-haired nurse in a pillowcase though which angularly bunched pieces of refined sugar. 
She took that pillowcase to the ‘senior nurse’ office and every day, who had the brains to come and ask for, received a few pieces of not pressed but a real refined sugar.
I, for one, had rains to ask twice a day.

And I tried to consume that sugar unnoticed because who had not brains to turn to the original source were clever enough to ask it from me.
I tried to lie, as if it was over, but then remembered that it was a wrong-doing and shared the sugar from another pocket in my pajamas.

Once in twenty days a black-haired woman with a sharp nose and, naturally, in the white medical coat, came to the hall in the middle of the corridor.
You could see at once that she was from the glassy-eyed, but I had already kicked that off and therefore took the version of the fifth unit old-timers as if she was a former circus acrobat. 

The acrobat cut the stubble off our faces with a hairdresser machine, and for the haircut, she used scissors, if you did not ask to cut it also with the machine in ‘zero' style. 

The cultural life was catered to by the TV set.
One hour before and one hour after the news program ‘Time’ during which it was a break for the procedures.
Some ten watchers gathered around it dragging stools and chairs from their wardrooms.
The paramedic by the observation wardroom also moved nearer.

At night the wardrooms were lighted with the electric bulbs.
Probably, so that no one did something to himself or his neighbor.
Sleeping with the light on is inconvenient because even if in your dreams you are walking in the wild its inevitable presence is felt all the same.
The corridor though was not lighted so bright and paramedics could get a normal rest in their chairs.

In the small hours, wardroom 9 was visited by a young guy eager to show how dexterously he juggled a pair of boiled eggs from a delivery. 
Sometimes he showed a small sized but artistically executed picture where a stark naked male was concentratedly chasing a girl in boots and a high Russian fillet. 
Her long tight braid flapped on the run and she looked back in fright at the meter-long dick of the determined pursuer.
Apparently, a copy of the original of the first half of the XIX century. 

Then a frail man with elusive eyes came to take the young guy away.
According to his repeatedly shared story, he got to the psychiatric hospital after accidentally breaking the window panes in the hutta of the Village Council with a stick not omitting a single glass.

He kissed the youngster in his pate under the stubble hair, called him ‘mnemormysh’ and led him back to his wardroom.
He kissed all the young people in the pate and called them ‘mnemormysh'. 
I had never heard such a word before, but it sounded very tenderly, like ‘pinniped pup’.

The time for getting up was announced by paramedics jingling their key bunches against the bed backs so that by the arrival of the head doctor and the nurses the fifth unit life would flow in its orderly channel.
First of all, all flocked to the toilet.

2 TOILET BOWLS FOR 80 PEOPLE ARE TOO LITTLE!

2 toilet bowls for 80 people are too little, so the queuing to them started in the corridor and inside it continued along the walls of two rooms – the hallway and the actual toilet.
