~~~ The Eastern Corridor ~~~

In the thick shade of the expiring night, the more solid blackness of the roadside forest belt began to show through, little by little. 

For any vehicle, such a road is just the capital punishment with no right of appeal to Philip Sober yet for my shank’s pony not so bad.
A walker makes five kilometers per hour, so they taught us in school.
By Uncle’s estimation, the district center is in fifteen kilometers, no more.
I started at a little past five, the bus to Moscow departs at nine.
Jingling gods! Life’s a delicious havvage!
And with the favorable wind.
The wind blows right from behind what’s on your mind?
The sailing will be plain to fetch a bottle of Portwein…
Slow down, little one, easy with cutting corners.
The dry law is vigilantly lurking. Forgot the Prohibition?
‘Dura lex, sed lex.’
Translation needed?
Don't you worry, buddy, Latin is a bro from our neighborhood.

Yet the vulgarity! The baseness of the theme: ‘portwein', ‘a bottle', flat as a pancake. 
Then what? Respect the art of hammerers. Folklore. Next to iambic.
No iambi zombie talk, private. Or we’ll have you rotten with fatigues at dactyl.
Ha! Who're you? Self-taught good for nothing. Screw your loose screw first. The gourmand with fluffy chopsticks. ‘Ah, iambus is not yummy! May I have some choree with a sprinkle of trochee, please?' How about grayling under sherry? 
Hmm, yes. The chorees are dying out. Fucked, in fact, with unfriendly ecology. Swampy vistas are closing in – ‘warmly approving the saved reserves we will hold aloof the initiative of the plan in excess with a feeling of deep satisfaction ahead of the time with centners of running meters from a hectare of rolled metal.’
Feel free to start up the red book for all the elegant belles-lettres. Doomed. Not a chance for survival.
The golden days of muses engulfed in the abyss of past…

‘The wrath sing, goddess, of Peleus' son, Achilles...’
This single line of the hexameter calls for two square meters of footnotes so that the folks suckled and brought up with editorials would get it what exactly that Achilles guy wants of the Brazilian football star’s kid.
But the paper deficit! We need it for printing about the growth of wealth and well-being!
You know the truth: if you want to live but there is no one to live with, you have to live with anyone you come across.
That’s why people adore folklore.
The perfection itself, mind you, can be found among those handcrafted items. Here, for your consideration:
‘It is the last time I ask you, bastards, who dared call God a rasp?!!’

In the dark, already slightly graying,  over the deserted road sounded a snort of a restrained chuckle.
The black clot of a tree floated up along the roadside and fell back.

However, they have schooled you in full.
Who’s around to look back at your causeless laugh?
"I walk keep smiling to myself and at the thought "what would they think of me?" I into laughter burst..." 
Another craft by the neighborhood folks?
No, it’s by some Czech with a shift to poetry.
You mean, Czechs are not folks? I’ll have your throat cut!
Have mercy, oh, Abraham! Check the bush maybe we’ll have a square deal – meal for Jehovah and your son unscratched.
And if I am Taras Bulba? 
Oh, yes! In the dried form, pressed for the herbariums. Robinson Crusoe’s goat is more of a Cossack than you. Shut up or the nanny-goat will die of laughter.

Really? But they said that laughter was the monopoly property of Khoma Sapiensoff.
Well, from the standpoint of physiology all is radiant clear – spasms and coughs tremendously benign to health. But what’s the meaning from the sense’s point of view?
Let’s have a look. Where are the decent people laughing? In the specially designated places. There look for an answer. In a circus, say, or…

Right! To the movies, we are going! 
That’s a comedy! Fantozzi a good fellow! Wow! Knows his trade!
Bang! Ding! Plop! Chink! Pisssssss…..
Glee and guffaw, giggling, laughing beyond all limits past all bounds.
Boo-ooh-ha! Ha-ho-ho! Gu-gu-hu! Wu-hu-hu!
And only my neighbor next to the left, a lady of immense proportions, sits listless, silent. 
Why? Napping or what? No, her gaze on the silver screen, yet no reaction!
The man there tries to stir her up with a run to hit his head against the lamppost.
The hall reported with a joyful volley.
And she? Good news she’s not yawning.
But what’s that? Unbelievable! On a minor episode, where Fantozzi, after another fall, plop, splash, whiz changes in a suit five times bigger his size and the public almost do not react, exhausted in the previous convulsions, from the exorbitant volumes of my neighbor rolls out the laughter of the same dimensions.
That’s the comedian! But how did he get her?
And now, when asked: why do people laugh? I answer – because of fear.
Fear?

Exactly! What’s more fearful for a woman than uglifying clothes?
But when the comedian's bicycle all of a sudden lost its saddle and he landed with his asshole onto the pipe left sticking up there the hall was shacking with the males' guffaw. 
A woman, in fact, won’t be frightened with such a trifle.

Nonsense! Laughter from fear!
 When scared, they run but not laugh. Besides, you smart arguments are based on the laughter of the base level. But people laugh because of not only that someone stumbled-slipped-sprawled-fell-into-drains, they laugh at witticisms as well. Then, there are still epigrams. Lots of causes to have a laugh. 
 
Verily, verily, I say unto you! Laughter comes from fear and is a request and a prayer addressed to the Unknown so that such a thing does not happen with them who's praying, I mean, laughing. 
The same underlying reason has the laughter caused by the finest witticisms.
Here, ‘ha-ha-ha’ means: ‘let me never be a target of such a joke!’
And laughing at oneself is a prayer: ‘let I never again step into it!’
They are inseparable Siamese – fear, and laughter. 
Tell me what you laugh at and I’ll say what you are afraid of!

So, Fool, you mean to say that someone who never laughs, is not afraid of anything?
You Majesty! We are not discussing anomalies, our subject matter is a representative of the class of vertebrates, the subclass of mammals, the species of primates, the subspecies of anthropoid with the Latin name ‘homo sapiens.' 
So don’t f-f.. fret our brains.

But look, then it turns out that by means of jokes you can learn…
Aha! Started getting it? Excellent. On we go! And here, by the way, a kilometer post.
What does it tell? No, I cant make out, it’s still dark.

Well, to hell! Let it be. It's not the first neither the last. Stop molesting orphan ones! Do you need it? Yomp your way. 
Oh, I’m sorry. No crooked tricks or dirty intent, I swear. Once again, please, forgive. Have a nice stay…

Hmm… So, what were we about?
A, well, of course! Considering the immortal question of the classic: ‘What are you laughing at?’
The answer is: at something that we fear to learn firsthand.
What is the forerunner of laughter?
That’s right – a smile.
And what is the smile? 
Right again – the show of teeth.
Let's say we meet each other at the lowest rungs of the evolutionary ladder. So I don't know what kind of stegosaurus you are, and you suspect me of being lungfishy. At that uneducated period, we roamed without passports. 
So, we meet and – first and foremost – what?. 
That's right! We bare our teeth. Say, look what I have, in case of you allow you excessive liberties. 
See, where all these laugh-hiccups and giggle-spasms spring from?

In its elementary basis, laughter is a means of self-defense with a Hegelian dual function – to scare away and to pray.
It is used, however, not in case of a real danger (it’s not the time for giggling) but when the threat is imaginary.
It is not applied in the absence of threat, or imagination, or when there is nothing to protect.
Using its monopoly on the above weapon, a man climbed up to the top of the mentioned ladder where they issue passports and enroll those who wish to the gyms where they teach kickboxing.
Amen.

Wow! It’s time to shout ‘eureka!’ and trot to the patent office.

Why, silly? It’s been a long time since all the wheels were reinvented.
Any supernova idea was brewing more than once in brains of a Chaldean priest, or a Greek sophist, a medieval alchemist, an Aztec knot-tier, a prophetic Brahman, or a Tibetan sage.
All discoveries and supergenius ideas are nothing more but an expression by means of other symbols or words the same truths old as the hills. 
Invariable, as the change of the seasons, phases of the moon, day and night. 
Every day is new and unique, every day is a repetition of myriad lots of exactly same days…

Beautifully wrapped, smartie. Yet, there’s a question from the audience: did you fix it firm enough, citizen?

No fear, marijuanisto! Nailed deeper than your… or is there a reasonable ‘bitter but’?

Uh-oh, alas, but, yes.
Where do you – in your shebang – place the smile of a two-month-old baby?
What is it afraid of when smiling to its mother, nenka, mutter or whatever?
That toothless smile seems to flash all you mental feasts straight down the drain.
Ain’t it, Mr. Brilliant Kid?

It’s dawning.
Murky-gray ceiling lay on the endless walls of hazy trunks, entangled with a mesh of hunger-black branches and twigs with occasional stains of tin-withered leaves.
Along the shredded asphalt, the comets of tiny shards of snow are rushing, snaking, drifting off their orbits, whirling the thin streams of dry powder snow.
The wind is favorable. From behind. So blow, buddy, blow!
Like hell, you will blow through the padded jacket presented by my aunt.
The head is tightly covered with a knitted hat of the ‘cock’ type.
The feet in sturdy soldier's shoes, in two pairs of socks. 

The road, whipped with snow streams, stretches to the horizon merging with infinity.
Blow, the curly one! Already Greeks knew that it’s easier to march under the flute playing.
Sturdy rig, firm road, what else is needed for happiness?
The forest belt parted letting a country road to fork off the roadway.
Through the gap peeped a surprised field: who’s so happy here?

And because of that field, and that there was a road ahead, and that the morning was so gloomy, and because the pale-transparent smoke of the white snow streaming with the wind, an unrestrained sudden joy, and uncontrollable delight welled up the throat, rushed and splashed out a cry into the confused desert: 
‘I! Am! Happy!’
The grainy snow whipping along the asphalt repeated, like a mirror, the whirlwind spiraling of clouds scudding low overhead.
‘Am! Happy!’ This time for some reason with a threat and a little questioningly.
‘Happy!’ That one sounded already sad.

Yes. The music played but shortly. Where are you, happiness? Only in the past or in the future. Elusive illusion.
And when coming across its tiny speck I’m always alone. Why so? It even hurts.
Now, if she were by. Though she needs no hiking marches.
Or if she saw on screen, in a dream, anywhere – this very morning, and this crippled road, a solitary traveler along…

Idiot! Will you ever get it? Stupid wretch!
There is no ‘she’ in existence but only indistinct sentimental driveling dreams of yours, unclear even to you, moron.
Dreams of an unimaginable mixture of heavenly beauty with a passion for pleasures of the most earthly nature, a combination of a cold-sharp mind with a tenderly fervent vagina craving for you only. 
Shut your lusty gape, kiddo. You’ve built a bridge atop a mountain and you’re waiting for a river to run under it.
And besides, for to get some anything you need to give somewhat something.
And what, if I’m kindly allowed to ask, do you have to offer?
So sharp and dandy padded jacket? Wow, yes, a practical thing. And being worn for just a week, no more. 
What? You even have got money? Fifty rubles?! That's a jackpot! 
Now, subtract a tenner for the bus ticket to Moscow, then twenty-five for a flight to Kiev, and a fiver for the local train from there. 
And don’t forget the havvage expenses. 
So for what reason are you to be loved with crazy passions?
Now, wipe your snots and just keep walking. Some business you’re a specialist in.

And he walked, stepping on the tails of the transparent bands of scampering grains of snow.
Each step was no different from the previous one, not any step changed a jot of the road; neither the low leaden sky nor the forest belts on both sides got changed. 
All and the same. That same all. Everything moves and stays the same.

Occasionally, the concrete kilometer posts with figures on blue tins were approaching and falling behind.
A few hours in a row of walking so, even with no burden, and the pain, though light but the nagging, would sip into the shoulder bones. 
He knew that. 
But not that day. 
The district center was fifteen kilometers from the village, so said his uncle. 
And from there started the transport services of a developed civilization.

Something loomed at a distance on the roadside.
Some massive thing.
Fixing his gaze on on that motionless strangeness midst the general chaotic stirring he was approaching along with tries at guessing: what could it be?
Some machinery.
Aha. What kind of it?
Who knows, they tinkle out lots of them for agriculture. 
Let's get closer and…
A slight burning sensation stirred in his bladder.
Would you but wait a bit with your urges?
Exactly, machinery, yet from another sphere...

He stopped at a tangerine-yellow road roller.
How could you possibly get to it, poor thing? Feels chilly, eh? That's it. Too accustomed to asphalt tropics. Bituminous heat and all that. 
How do you plan to survive the wither? You can't fly to warmer countries, too heavy on the rise. And it's too late anyway. 
And no gadget to dig you a furrow with. Not your profile. 
The only chance is anabiosis. Freeze into the surrounding environment, like them those cold-blood earth-water animals. Although not a bed of roses too.
He poured his sympathy out onto the scattering of small rubble. 
Zipped up the fly.
Stepped over the uneven dark spot on the road, an hour or two earlier it was the tea prepared by Uncle’s wife for a meal.
Everything flows, everything changes. One and the same tea cannot be poured out twice.

It was his second visit to the village where he was now walking from.
The first time though he had not come himself but was brought there.

The days of that summer lasted forever, unhurried, like the slow stream dividing the village into ours and theirs.
A quiet creek rolling soundlessly along the sandy bottom. The water was knee-deep.
A little upstream you got into the green-shaded tunnel between the walls of dense willows.
Whitebait brushed tickling against the shanks.

It feels creepy especially when you are twelve and they told you some scary stories about leeches and ‘horse hair’.
And behind the village, quite at a distance, maybe at an hour’s walk, there was the river Mostya.
Not too wide but you could have a swim.
And he was swimming to the bright grassy bank and pushing the red-and-blue ball on the water, glancing at the light spot of his face reflected in the wet, spinning sides of the ball.
Or was that ball and the grassy bank at another river of his childhood?
But the fact remained that he entered the Mostya river as well.
Twenty years before...

Twenty years later, on his second visit, he did not enter it.
It was too cold for swimming. Late autumn.
Emptiness reigned in the widely spread waves of the fields.
Empty was the village.
Small hillocks of broken bricks – ruins of houses overgrown with rank grass.
After Khan Mamai’s horde had passed.
The remaining ones were silent, squatting lowly as if pressed down by the ocean of the faded sky. 
The Marianas Trench.

‘You to whom?’
‘To Sehrguey Mikhailovich Ogoltsoff.’
‘And who are you?’
‘Sehguey Ogoltsoff.’
‘So, the nephew?’ guessed she quickly.
‘Exactly.’ he agreed, holding back his smile.
She invited to pass into the room, and was sorry for the uncle having just left for work after the break, praised the scrawny cat who in the morning predicted the visit of guests by thoroughly washing its face and returned to the kitchen with the large Russian oven and slow ticking of weight-driven clock on the wall, to the table covered with old oil-cloth above the plywood doors of its box, under persistent stares from the silent crowd of differently sized photos in the corner between two windows.

He sat leaning against the backrest of the couch, under an arched window to the front garden, examining the interior of a single room with a brick stove in front of him from which a smooth gray pipe of asbestos-concrete rose up and by the ceiling deflected to the kitchen wall.
At the opposite wall, next to the stove, stood a broad bed with paint-coated legs and backs, with a pyramidal tower of cushions by the plush carpet stretched on the wall with small nails, where, in one of the thousand-and-one nights, the young man abducted a beauty on his plush horse, and the accomplice followed him, glancing back at the minarets of the sleeping city. 
In the corner of the room, a brown wardrobe was waiting for their arrival. 

On this side, next to the couch, stood a table under the second of arched windows, with chairs pushed under it and, by the blank wall to the neighbors, a television set on a high shelf.
From under the TV to the kitchen door a rug-mat stretched in the same directions with planks of the ceiling overhead, naked and blue.
She tinkled plates washing them up in the kitchen, occasionally coming to the door of the room to ask if his parents were healthy, and where he worked, and what’s his job.

By the cautiousness of the questions, he understood, that she knew. 
As if it could be otherwise.
His father, since retired, was visiting his native village almost every summer, bringing his granddaughter along.
He surely had been sharing his troubles with his brother.
In the kitchen, the front door banged:
‘Grandma! Two fives!’
‘You've come?’ responded she with tender strictness. ‘Take off your jacket. And do not shuffle that way. Go say hello to the uncle (to his whispered question) your mom’s cousin.’
From behind the door handle, the boy’s face with a strand of hair sticking up in a cow-lick above the right corner of the steep forehead slowly peeped out with the childishly serious look.
After a prolonged ‘hello-oo' he disappeared to go on with the inaudible questioning of his grandmother. 
‘Lenochka’s dad,’ answered she laying the table. ‘Remember her staying at grandma Sasha’s last summer?’
She called the guest at the table.

Supping the meal, the schoolboy looked at the window with a detached stare.
Could you remember what they see with such wide-open gaze those seven-year-old aliens until another question about school brings them back to their senses?
Well, at least the unknown uncle from nowhere was eating silently.
The boiled potatoes with fried onions the boy rejected as well as the tea.
The grandmother sent him to the village smithy to tell his grandfather about the guest who with polite thank-you returned to the couch.

He sat full of lean satiety in dense silence wrapping the house.
Outside the two windows, the gray wind cooed and wooed with impetuous gusts the apple tree in the front garden who angrily waved away the inconstant any lady's man. 
It’s time to insert the inner frames for winter.
On the opposite side, through the lilac-velvet night, the kidnappers were still galloping silently with their prey. 
Although she seemed happy to be stolen and not to got by old vizier with his fat eunuchs... 

It’s weird, the extent of how everything around was befitting me.
And so it would be on all other days of the vacation.

In the evenings I’d be visiting my aunt Alexandra to overeat her pancakes, and once even a chicken.
A rich villager.
In the mornings after the breakfast when my uncle the blacksmith would go by bicycle to his smithy I started to roam over the fields and after the midday meal cut logs from the hillock of firewood dumped next to the house for the winter.
A beautiful Russian woman Valentina, of her husband's last name – Zhelezina, my cousin and the mother of Maxim the outstanding student living in the house of his grandparents, would invite me to visiting her house, where she kept the younger ones – the hooligan Volodka and post-toddler Tanyushka who still did not wanted to part with the pacifier.
She would tell me the village stories and about her life in Moscow where she was courted by a Frenchman and in Kustanai, where she was married to a German from the local colonists.

Her current husband would take me to the village store and I would drink bottled beer and listen to mujiks’ talk of nothing but with so native intonations that it takes your breath away with sentimental sympathy.
And by that time my aunt would have already given me her present of a black padded jacket, which was the must wear for anyone there except for kids and teenagers so that I did not stick out like a sore thumb in my checkered jacket. 
The ante-biblical simplicity of life and at the same time with so many admixtures. 

An old woman came to the store to exchange potatoes from her garden for kolkhoz kopecks, her utter misery shows through but the mujiks are next to bowing before her caps in hand.
She is a relic of their past – the embodiment of the old-regime landowners, but they need that relic and would create it from a poor retired teacher if only her facial features were delicate enough.

Returning from one of the supper evenings at my aunt's, I for some reason stopped at nothing and stared in the dry tall grass for a long time. 
What for?
The next evening my aunt answered me that, yes, my grandmother Martha’s hut stood exactly in that spot.

On the last night before leaving, I came with the farewell visit to Valentina’s house.
My checkered jacket turned out exactly her husband's size, they were obviously impressed with such generosity and were calling the jacket ‘a suit’.
To Valentina, I presented my suspiciously feminine bag. 
Finally, I managed to get rid of it. 

We went out into the darkness of the street without houses.
Everyone understood that we would never see each other again.
Valentina embraced me and wept.
I stroke the shoulder of her padded jacket and said:
‘Boodya, sister.’
Then I shook hands with her husband Zhelezin and went away.
So strange.
In my whole life, I never heard or used that soothing word of ‘boodya’; it came all of itself.

I come from here; it's a pity I will not be useful here...

People started making wry faces at me as early as the bus station near the Izmaylovo Park, where the Ryazan-Moscow bus arrived.
At Zhulyany airport in Kiev, where the airplane from Moscow landed at midnight, hostile attitude to me from the surrounding public increased geometrically to confirm the correctness of the old saying – people judge you by your zek outfit.
Public opinion on my account was voiced by a passenger on the platform of the underground subway station:
‘Where the fuck do you barge through among the people?’

My difference from them was in my being a black man.
The black padded jacket, black pants, black soldier shoes.
Only the ‘cock’ hat on my head fell out of the ensemble with its brown and blue stripes.
It would seem more or less forgivable if I were loaded with some kind of luggage, but a black man with his hands in his pockets – it’s outrage, it’s a challenge to the social order, it’s a cheeky bomzh...

We bypass them with an unseeing glance, so that—save, God!—avoid an eye contact, or we bark:
‘Where the fuck do you barge through among the people?’
True, in those days we did not know the word ‘bomzh’, for that sort of people they used the term ‘bich’ then.
‘Where do you barge, you bich?.. Get out of here, fucking bich!’

The word was brought by the seamen who went abroad.
There, in the port cities, those who spent the nights on the beach and pick up the scraps and offal left by vacationers were called ‘beach-combers'. 
Our people did not bother and borrowed only the first half of that word.

So the people without a certain place of residence and with obscure occupation began to be called ‘biches’.
A short, biting term. However, it died out.
Firstly, those who did not speak English and never went to sea began to slip into synonyms substituting ‘knoot’ (which in Russian means ‘whip’) for ‘bich’ that in Russian also means ‘whip’.
And secondly, the abbreviation is always stronger, especially with the support of the state

(….we are all from the USSR, got it?
Whoever does not understand will receive clarification in the CheKa, aka the KGB…)

When the law enforcement organs abbreviated the ‘without a certain place of residence’ which in Russian becomes BOMZh, other terms had no chances.
In the great and mighty Russian language, you can't find a synonym for ‘bomzh'. 
The nearest to it ‘tramp’ or ‘bum’ smack of mothballs and infantile lisp of Indian cinema.

Once upon a time in Russia lived peddlers, aka offenny.
In order to survive, they invented a language of their own.
Dark for uninitiated, the Offenny language went into oblivion together with its carriers – no one had bothered to compose its dictionary.
The current ‘fenya’ of the criminal world is also for initiated but has nothing to do with the Offenny except for echoing the latter's name.
Considering ‘fenya’ the language of Russian mafia is not correct because it borrowed from Russian only grammatical structures.
Its vocabulary is fairly international.
Kicked out of secondary school, half-educated students continuing their careers in prison poured in 'fenya' the bits and scraps of words they heard in foreign language lessons.
That way ‘fenya' feathered its hat with ‘atas!' (from the French ‘atasion!'), ‘haza' (from German ‘Hause'), ‘havat' (from English ‘have a'), and borrowings from the languages in the family of friendly and free brother nations fused into common the USSR. 

(...however, back to my ‘malyava’, aka letter (from German ‘mahlen)…)

The protector of the public foundations who offended me in the subway had no notion that under the appearance of a black man there lurked a vulnerable soul in me and the digestive tract of a delicate organization. 
I myself did not suspect it until felt that after the mentioned insult I gradually became ‘mournful with the belly'. 
In the area of the Maidan, the then October Square, it became clear that I could not hold back the pressure of the tides storming the ampoule (following the large intestine) and leaving no hope to reach the greens by the University with the only public toilet I knew in the central part of Kiev.

Fortunately, I remembered the Ministry of Education with their ministerial toilet on the second floor.
And not too far from the square. 
Only the internal intense rioting called for more suppression efforts. 

I flung the tall entrance door open and rushed in a concentrated jog up the marble stairs.
‘Hey! Where?’ shouted the attendant from the chair to the left of the entrance.
'Check of the plumbing equipment,' answered I over the shoulder, without slowing down the businesslike strides. 

When all the sorrows subsided, I left the restroom, polished like a malachite jewelry case, and descended the white wide stairs, like the archangel Gabriel – slowly and blissfully shining.
I wanted to share the Good News and, turning my face to the attendant, informed benevolently:
‘Look! The check proved all's okay. Yes.’
And I went out into the blatantly atheistic the Karl Marx street, made up of a dense wall of the similar severely administrative buildings. 

(...Karl certainly knew it was partaking in the collective that helped Man to become the crown of nature.
Because of single-handed you can’t neither kill a mammoth not fly to the moon.
But how fragile the state of unity is!.
With what willingness do we divide ourselves, humans, by the color of skin and hair, by caste, faith, party affiliation: they are not us, we are not them, we are one ruble more expensive.

Some impenetrable mystery – how a herd of the ape-shaped boobs keeps able for collective efforts with its chronic inclination to self-castration?..)
