
The visit to Kanino awakened in me the growth of national self-awareness.
To me, a descendant of Novgorodian ushkuynik robbers and Tatar raiders, who for centuries, in turn, were raping Ryazan women, it was not appropriate, but even disgraceful to all day long give the stinking rags my hugs to stuff them into the press box. 
So, for the first time in my working career, I applied for firing me on the strength of my own free will. 

Now, in my workbook, the disparaging Article 40 was shoved behind by the completely acceptable standard record ‘dismissed on the application’ and I went to hire on in the KaPeVeRrZe Plant.
Everything went without a hitch, I had smoothly past the medical checks but at the very last moment in the personnel department I suddenly heard ‘no go’.
Why not?

It turned out, there had remained no quota for me.
The head of the personnel department exposed it in detail, that there were an unadvertised but strict regulations forbidding to hire a person with higher education among less than 1000 workmen without diplomas. 
In the plant collective of 5000 employees, there was not an extra thousand to allow for my case. 
Some sons of a bitch with diplomas arrived before me and the quota was over. 

(...the disappointment did not kill me, I somehow used to cope with falling through, nevertheless, it was a significant shock to realize the existence of the ‘shadow' legislation ignorance of which did not exempt from its being applied to you…) 

Then I went to the city outskirts opposite the Settlement, to the plant of ‘Motordetail’ where I was hired on as a bricklayer in the Construction Shop Floor.
The bastards with diplomas had not yet infiltrated the large modern enterprise.

With the exclusion of the havvage in its canteen, the plant ‘Motordetail' stood out as a crystal dream and a model of an industrial enterprise. 
Just a passing look at its construction shop was enough to agree with the statement.
The spacious locker rooms were culturally tiled and paneled in brown colors of the spectrum, and they were combined with as spacious and also tiled shower rooms.
Recollection of the said conveniences waiting for you at the end of the day would warm your heart during the working hours. 

I knew my job and was applied as a bricklayer-loner for non-standard tasks in separate places.
They equipped me with a pair of helpers to bring bricks and mortar and – forward! – to panel the underground water well with a circular wall, or laying the chimneys on roofs of two-apartment cottages. 

I liked the frequent change of tasks: each required a special approach and circumspection which keeps our mind from slipping into sloth and our backbone from getting stiff.
And for the periods of calm between the missions I was sent to the team of bricklayers constructing the 130-apartment block for the plant employees.
The team was not aces, but they would live in what they had built. 

Neither in the locker room not with the team I was not a conversationalist you’d dream about.
When asked something, I would reply and then again keep silent.
I was talking to myself in my mind.
My helpers were often changed.
Their rotation was seen to by Narcological Department 2, aka Narco-2.
Narco-2 constituted a crucial part of the conveyor production of slaves. 

Slaves in the epoch of Developed Socialism?
Do not forget the spiral-like advancing of the historical progress.

The system worked as follows: 
a militia van rushes into a village and grabs a pair of mujiks whom the village council chairman had indicated as prone to alcohol consumption.
(And who is not?)
The catch is brought to Narco-2 for treatment of alcoholism.
Anyone entertaining a too high opinion of his human rights gets a shot of sulfur and until the end of the treatment, he no longer takes risks to discuss the subject. 
The treatment term is from two to three months. 
The patients live in the hostel, eat their havvage in the canteen, work wherever they would send them.
NO PAYMENT FOR THEIR WORK.
All earned by them is taken as reimbursement for accommodation, havvage, and medical care. 
The medical care is the pills dispensed to the patients after the working day which they immediately flush down the toilet. 
When keeping a low profile they are allowed to visit their villages on the weekends.

In the city, the start of the procedure is simplified. 
The precinct militia officer announces to the drunks of his beat who is the next to go for treatment and they know it’s better to fall in line.

The Great October Revolution proclaimed among its aims effacing the differences between town and country...

Each person certainly has their own story and if you keep quiet and don't interrupt with attempts at narration of your own, they will eventually tell theirs to you. 
Not necessarily about themselves, maybe about a relative or a neighbor.

For example about a German from a squad occupying a village hutta.
Each morning he yelled something to which his comrades responded with laughter.
One of them had a little Russian and explained to the landlady the content of his yells: 
‘Gimme those two bitches – Hitler and Stalin, I’ll give them short shrift with my Schmeisser!’
The story was told me by an old woman preparing to retire from the construction shop floor, who, as a small girl, saw Germans living in her mom's hutta. 

(...the question is for how long they would tolerate such an entertainer in the Red Army?..)

Or about a mujik who made friends with a stranger in a beer bar.
They went out together and strolled along the street until the new acquaintance had an urge to loosen his bowels.
He dropped in a nearby yard with a promise to be back in a moment.
He urinated there and then wanted to nick a carpet from the linen rope and was arrested.
So was the mujik standing on the sidewalk who got four years of imprisonment as the accomplice.
Yes, there still occurred some happenstance mistakes in the most human judicial system of the world... 

And the executioner was proud to tell his story.
Actually, he considered himself a hero, not an executioner.
He served at the front Smersh battalion mopping up the areas taken control of and when they captured an RLA soldier he personally and heroically took the traitor to a nearby forest. 
Although at the headquarters there was a special platoon with sub-machine guns for the purpose.
So they two walked there arm in arm, only the hands of one in the pair were tied on his back.
And on the way, he began a casual talk about the family and kids. 
So that some of the captives even started to hope for something.
And then he said:
‘Why do you, bitch, betrayed our motherland?’
And he shot his TT pistol, not to kill, though, but make a hole in the liver with his bullet so that the bastard wriggled for ten minutes before dying of the lethal wound.

After the war, he wanted to be a diplomat, but they explained to him that a Soviet diplomat being an embodiment of our motherland abroad should be flawless. 
Unfortunately, his body was missing three fingers cut off by a bomb fragment when already in Germany.
That's why he had to enter an institute for economics and get the diploma of a middle-rank manager. 

I slightly knew his son who was always ready with slogans like ‘we’ll not allow the enemy to trample our native land!’
He apparently inherited his dad’s ideology...

In Konotop the ideology was hardly ever looked at from a respectful perspective.
And in the heat of an argument folks did not choose some high-flown words.
Thus, for example, to upbraid a female, they would say: 
‘You are a Nyusya Kamenetskaya!’

Nyusya was a city idiot.
She silently walked the sidewalks, no one addressed her and she addressed no one because she was a quiet case.
But you could see with one look at her hat, that she was an idiot.
Sort of a red bonnet with a bouquet of artificial flowers.
By that bonnet, she was recognized from afar and small kids in the street would run after her and shout: 
‘Nyusya Kamenetskaya!’
But she did not reply and walked silently on.
A casual city idiot.

The executioner’s son murdered her.
Late in the evening in the Loony park.
He did not want the motherland to be trampled by quiet idiots. 
Lyalka had to see the purist off in the grated ‘stolypin’ car from the railway station.
Because of to make sure that the likes of Nyusya would never dare anymore infest the sacred sidewalks of motherland that son of the Smersh hero…

(...shut up!
Certain thing needn't ever be told even to grown-up children!..) 

I don't know why, but some of the stories are darker than all the thousand and one night put together… 

But even in the tragic layouts there always are nooks for optimism!

In that winter the frost was reaching absolutes.
Walking along the street you could hear some tender clink in the head – that were your thoughts turned to ice in the brain and tinkling against the convolutions walls. 
And smack in the middle of that pole of cold, you came across an announcement at the plant Checkpoint entrance: "Those wishing to partake in a ski trip to the Seim apply at the tourism group."
Haven't I told it was a very modern and advanced plant? 
In the basement of one of the five-story apartment blocks in the Plant area, I was once making a screed for rubber covering of a stadium for mini football... 

I found the room of the tourism group.
They said: on Saturday, at the Checkpoint entrance, with own skis. 
I brought my skis, the ones I was running in the forest of the Object.
There was a bus at the Checkpoint entrance for those who did not feel like skiing that morning. 

Nonetheless, there were three volunteers to ski all the 12 kilometers.
Some girl with a guy courting her, and I.
The ski-track in the deep snow was being made in turn.
But what a beauty!
Especially when we entered the forest.
Because of the frost, the snow became as fine as flower and the sun sparkled in each of those tiny crystals.
The other two skiers knew the location of the plant recreation camp, but I saw it for the first time.

The houses made of wood had steep gable roofs, like in the Swiss Alps.
The whole forest around drowned in the snow and only the roofs stuck out because of their steepness. Class!

My room was just under the roof and from inside I could again admire how steep it was.
It was a room for two and my roommate turned out one of the veteran tourists, not a novice like me. 

I understood that their group was sort of closed shop at the plant and the advertisement was just to show to the management that they were actively attracting the masses.
They did not expect there would turn up a curious villager of me.

On the other hand, he got a fresh listener for his stories about their hiking in the Urals where all week long they walked in the rain. 
From morning till night.
Yet afterward, in every outing that he was taking part, there was not even a drizzle. 
That’s why in the tourism group they nicknamed him ‘dry talisman’.
Whenever they went without him they got soaked through with the rain and quite the opposite with his participation.

Then he left and returned with a bottle of the medicine alcohol,
He poured me a full glass and measured out twenty drops for himself.
We drank and had a snack with the sandwiches he had brought.
Then he went away and from the first floor came the sounds of music.
Understanding that the free medicine alcohol was a means to switch me off so that I did not mess around with the group's cultural program, I lay down on the bed. 
However, I noticed that the steep roof was in the state of too active waving and for that reason I got up and went downstairs.

They arranged a quick dance in the hall.
The light was turned off and only colored lamps were blinking rhythmically.
I also hopped for a while in their circle.
Then I moved to the next room.
The light there was on and along the walls there sat ladies of non-skiing age, probably, the tourists’ mothers from the bus.
In the center stood a six-pocket billiards table.
Dry talisman was fooling around rolling the balls before the mothers.
He was surprised to see me up but gave me the cue when I asked.
Believe it or not, but with three biting strikes, I send three balls into the pockets. 
Even I myself was stunned because I never really played billiards.

I stopped at that, returned the cue and went out into the yard.

The darkness around was dark as in the middle of the forest cut with the light from the windows and high fire in the barbecue to make coals for meat processing.
Not one alive soul was around.
I went up to the fire, looked at the flames and felt blues – everyone was like everyone else and only I was such a slice forlorn and clear-cut. 
And the blues drove my intoxication away, I went up into the room and fell asleep because of the grief...

And in the summer I discovered the existence of Game, with the capital letter. 
There was a football match between the plant team and a visiting one in the ‘Avangard’ stadium in the Central Park.
It attracted an audience of some twenty cut-off slices like me who hadn’t a f-f.. frolic to do, and two or three random drunks.

So, the teams got out to the center, the referee, the coin toss, all that.
They started the game, sort off.
But what would you want?
Factory teams, their trade committees had bought them trunks and leggings but no outfit would hide the fact that mujiks were far over their thirties.
Maybe some fifteen years before a pair of them attended the Youth Sports School volleyball section, that’s all their training.
And the field really big indeed – the standard football field.
While a poor bastard jogged from one end of it to the other he became a sore sight with his tongue hanging out and over the shoulder.
You couldn’t but feel pity for the guy.
But since I came to the match I sat there, what’s the difference when you don't have a.. anything else to do.
No use of carping.

And suddenly the tall poplars in the dense row behind the empty opposite stands stirred and rustled…
Like the breath of an invisible giant flew over them.

But all that had already become unimportant because of that on the field there unexpectedly was unfolding such a game for which you were all leaning forward, clutching the planks of the bench under you and turning your head from side to side to follow the ball rocketing around the field dissecting the air by its flight like a white cannonball which was not allowed to ever touch the ground..
Midfielder soared up a half-meter above his own height to pass the ball to the right striker who, one-touch, sent it to the center.
The center striker cleverly caught the pass, kicked the ball over the defender, easily bypassed him and what a mighty strike!
The–from no way to guess where and how emerged–left midfielder intercepted the ball and sent it far away to the center of the field where at once they kick up a skirmish to get it…
We watched spell-bound closely following the ricochets of the ball from one team to another, getting accelerated with each hit of a leg, or a head, or a chest… 
It was not them who played the game, it was the game who played with them.
It was Game. 

Finally, even the drunks realized that something unprecedented was happening on the field.
They roared and whistled like a hundred-thousand crowd went mad in the stands.
Probably, that shooed off the invisible.

The players, one by one began to shirk and soon they just jogged around in their soaked through T-shirts… 

I am not too much of a football fan, yet now I am convinced that there is a real Game in existence.

(...five minutes of Game, is it not enough?
Fans of renown clubs might have seen more, but in bits, not at a stretch, poor homeopaths.

Yes, that Game was gone, dissolved, raced away like a gust of wind, like a burst of happiness, but it was there and it still fascinates me…)
