
The reason for my keeping silent was that I had bitten my tongue.
At first, I let it enjoy all the freedom of speech it wanted, but a month after my getting a job there was a general meeting of the construction shop floor workmen attended by a representative of the management of the ‘Motordetail’.
There was an unmistakable air of a leader about that guy of a representative.
You can’t imagine such an individual as a child with a balloon, or a youth frustrated with his acne.
No go.
He came from his mother’s womb ready-made, just like that – half-bold, wearing glasses, with hanging stomach and the well-bred stateliness.

In his speech before the meeting, he outlined the tasks facing us in so a crucial period of the acceleration. 
It was the time for everyone to work harder at their workplaces, we, the workmen, at different construction sites, they, the management, at their posts, steering our engagement and activities to achieve the set goals.
He finished and the meeting chairman asked if there were any questions.
I raised my hand.

(...it was a breach of unadvertised rules, by which the question about questions was closing any meeting.
However, I raised my hand because he really put my back up that nightingale from the plant management…)

I asked to explain the difference between the ‘engagement’ and ‘activities’ I was really curious. Thank you.

The management representative whispered something to the meeting chairman and the latter announced the meeting closed. 
The participants, with relief, hurried to their homes.

A couple of days later a guy from the village of Bochky who was coming to work by motorcycle entered the locker room with his round biker helmet under his armpit, like an astronaut on the launch pad, and announced his intention to change the lock in his locker because of schizophrenics walking around the room. 
He did not address to or point at anyone specifically, but most of the present mujiks turned their heads in my direction. 
That’s why I had bitten my tongue

(...you can't kick against so mighty levers of power with their arsenal of unadvertised regulations, elusive omnipresence, and superb pedagogical skills – they even managed to teach the ‘schizophrenic' word to a moron from Bochky…) 

‘You been to Romny?’
Here, in the bathing hall of the Konotop bathhouse filled with clouds of steam, the noise of water rushing from taps, the clank of tin basins against marble tops of low tables, each of us looked like an ‘irrevocably free' from the Area of the fifth unit in the regional psychiatric hospital. 
‘I've been in Romny, but I cannot remember you.' 
Even I myself admired the impeccability of the poetic rhythm of my answer.

The neighbors stopped rubbing soap in their sponges and, pricking up their ears moved closer – the Konotopers had an innate propensity for poetry.

I continued to stare at the inquirer.
The accordion groans over the evening Area… it's getting dark… soon to go up for the night… these eyes… those same eyes only without the oily blueness over the iris… 
‘Volodya!’
The neighbors pulled back.
Some of them grabbing the tin basins move over to other tables.
I love the Konotopers’ polite understanding, they never want to be in the way of intimate developments…

How could I not recognize him right away?
One of us three who were sharing two beds.
He smiled confusedly.
The absence of that quirk in his eye put me off the track at first… 

(...it’s not the glassy-eyedness, it’s just like a thin film floating over the eyes.
Exactly the same steely-bluish filming I saw in the eyes of the inhabitants of the Azeri village of Krkchyan when they arrested me on the slope of a tumb taking for an Armenian spy.
In fact, I was just picking blackberry there, aka mosh, aka ozhina…)

By official version, the Karabakh war lasted for three years, 1992 – 1994, but, in fact, it started much earlier and hasn’t ended yet.
On the third (in the unofficial estimation) year of the war, when I stopped to like the expression in Satenic’s eyes, I made an attempt at evacuating her from the theater of war.
By a strange coincidence she, together with Ashot and Ruzanna, got to 13 Decemberists, Konotop.

Imagine my surprise when, three months later, she confronted me with the fact of her return with the children.
I had to fly to Yerevan to meet them at Zvartnots airport for the subsequent delivery, also by helicopter, to Stepanakert.

(...on their arrival day the city has not yet recovered from the shock of the death of 25 people killed by a single ‘Grad’ volley…)

Unfamiliar people in Yerevan, learning where we were going to, suggested to at least leave the children, Ashot and Ruzanna (in alphabetical order), by them. 

When we got to the apartment in Stepanakert which our friends were renting to us for free, I asked for the reason for so a quick return. 
‘I realized that living just for living’s sake is not worth the while.’

Here is a good example of the impact of the environment.
Take an Armenian woman, brought up in all the strictness of patriarchal-matriarchal way of life, let her live for three months in Konotop and she will come back without asking for a permission and philosophizing already, and she will start to give out wise maxims.
Hello! Please, receive and sign here…

But couldn’t that wisdom see that fearing for just yourself is easier that fearing for you plus those who you love?
Especially when the air alarm sirens start their wailing, or from the tumb of Camel Back thunder the shots of naval guns brought there from Caspian flotilla?
Not mentioning ‘Grad’ missiles that make no noise at all when on the fly to their final din-bang-crush and half the block is wiped off.
After all, we live in an age of high technologies.

(...and again I got washed off somewhere else.
I was talking about Romny, right?
And a madhouse and war are two big differences.
Or are they?..)

That all to elucidate the fact that, in general, I did not have time to acquaint Satenic with certain facts of my previous curriculum vitae, being busily waiting for a suitable occasion. 

And I was curious a bit: what information will she scoop up there.
During that evacuation period.
None.
The Konotopers do not rat on their own.

The only puncture happened in a conversation with a fellow employee.
(Satenic even got a job at the KEMZ plant when in the evacuation.)
Having learned that Satenic’s husband name was Ogoltsoff, the gossip said:
‘Hmm..’

Here, probably, and all of the compromising material leaked on me to the Transcaucasia from Konotop sources.

Yes, life kept rolling along the same rails – there was the bath, and the beach, and the calls from Twoic.
And I everywhere played my rolled-in role, but somehow I got already separated from everything, and from the systematized life, and from my part in it.
I became like that guy who, leaning on the fence around the children’s ground, like, watches the kids scurry about in the sandbox.
There’s Twoic, and the bosses with helpers, and I myself with my smoothed role, but I did not really care about all that fuss.

In the spring, Twoic called me to Nezhin to the institute student hostel, like, to kick up a party in the old days' style. 
I remember for sure that it was Thursday, a bath day, and, apparently a pre-holiday day, he would not call me in the middle of the week.
I took a towel and underwear for change and went to Nezhin, though there was no steam room in the hostel yet the shower still remained.

In the hostel lobby, auntie Dina was sitting on duty. 
She had not changed a single bit and, of course, she didn’t let me pass inside.
I asked a passer-by student to visit the room where, as arranged, Twoic already had to be waiting for my arrival, and tell him about the predicament.
He went upstairs and I had a discovery.

A young student entered the lobby from the hostel corridor wearing a crumpled dressing-gown and a sleepy face.
She did not give me any look, another one of casual visitors turning up in the hostel lobby, but just came up to the window nearby. 
I waited for Twoic or a message through which of the back side windows on the first floor I could climb in. 
I was not at all prepared that my body, without any command from me, or permission, would unexpectedly freak out and throw my right hand up and behind my head, raising my elbow up in the air.
Such a cheeky kink!

Was it triggered by the nearness of the common-looking girl with her face of not so well-kneaded dough? 
Or was that her crumpled dressing gown to hook me up so?
In any case, it was outrageous, moreover without any expressed demand!
That body of mine really went too far.
I, personally, did not intend any gestures!

And the cause of the mutiny aboard, a couple meters off me, was staring at the absolutely deserted landscape from the two-story canteen behind the gray glass of the window.
Some shocking discovery.

The messenger returned and said the door of the indicated room was locked.
Apparently, Twoic had already begun an old style shake-up of a complaisant chick. 

I went out of the hostel.
To be back in Konotop before the bath closing hour was just unthinkable. 
But it was a Thursday!
Okay, there remained the lake in the Count’s Park.
I headed there the shortest way.

A group of student lads was coming up along the same shortcut from the park in their sportswear. 
They reached the pipe from which Fedor and Yakov had once flopped into the water. 
There was no water anymore and the moat turned into a wide grassy ditch. 
One of them crossed it walking along the shaky pipe.

Wow! It seemed to become a student tradition!
So what?
Drumming myself in the chest and shouting ‘it’s me! I’m the legend! It’s been started by me!’?

In sad, elegiac mood I entered the park and strolled to the narrower part of the lake by the thickets in the deserted parts.
I undressed there and in the altogether went into the water.
Rubbing the soap all over myself, I threw it ashore and scrubbed the hand-reachable parts of the body.
Then, to wash the foam off, I churned along a little turning over in a screw-wise twirl before diving towards the shore.
White spits of foam remained on the black ripples.
The birth of Aphrodite.
The f-f.. frivolous Little Mermaid, thought I rubbing myself with the towel.
No, I’m not a pervert.
It, somehow, gets so all by itself and then just rolls on … in a progressive rotation spiral-wise ahead...

Lenochka entered the sewing school in the Sumy city and went there to study.
I did not have any reason to go on living at 13 Decemberists.
I found a place on the opposite outskirts of Konotop, closer to the ‘Motordetail’.

It was a summer kitchenette of 2×3 meters, in the yard of a hutta whose owner worked at the wastewater treatment plants where I once laid individual walls.
The kitchenette's brick stove under the low ceiling left room only for a bed and a desk by the window yet for me, it was enough. 

I only slept there and read books in German with a German-Russian dictionary of medical terms because there was not any other in the bookstore. 
The rent was only 15 rubles, but nevertheless, I finally stopped sending out the already irregular alimony transfers in two directions.

Deepening into German was needed for the final showdown with that old good Freud. 
As an attested schizophrenic with a certain store of experience in the field studies, I did not see any reason for his fixation on the symbolism of genitals.
Well, yes, a cigar may seem to look like a dick and the ashtray may have been associated with a vagina and so on and so forth. 
But what of it?
They got fixed to these interpretations and had no more progress than a stick in the mud.

(...I finally realized that Freud, in fact, is a storyteller, like, say, Hans Christian Andersen, they differ only in their stock of words.
Freud divides the Kingdom of consciousness into four parts (a good fellow Sigmund, that was a step forward from the Hegel’s triads):
the Duchy Consciousness;
the March Subconscious;
the Baronetcy Ego; and
the County Super-Ego.

Ah! How nice and beautiful!
There is so much of miraculous finesse, so much of poetry in them those tales!

Anyone has the right to a personal scientific theory, however, theories are checked by their practical results.

Based on the theory of his own concoction, Freud cured 12% of his patients.
They could have recovered on their own accord or were healed with the merciless road-roller of time changes, but we will give them to Freud as a reward for his merits – he had offered at least some gaudy oasis when the topic was as empty and stark naked as the arid desert.
Besides, he still inspires lots of artists dabbing vinaigrette from phalluses and vaginas…)

And in that kitchenette, the long-conceived plan got finally settled in my mind.
It was the time to leave Konotop.

