~~~ The Eastern Corridor ~~~

In the thick shade of the expiring night, the more solid blackness of the roadside forest belt began to show through, little by little. 

For any vehicle, such a road is just the capital punishment with no right of appeal to Philip Sober yet for my shank’s pony not so bad.
A walker makes five kilometers per hour, so they taught us in school.
By Uncle’s estimation, the district center is in fifteen kilometers, no more.
I started at a little past five, the bus to Moscow departs at nine.
Jingling gods! Life’s a delicious havvage!
And with the favorable wind.
The wind blows right from behind what’s on your mind?
The sailing will be plain to fetch a bottle of Portwein…
Slow down, little one, easy with cutting corners.
The dry law is vigilantly lurking. Forgot the Prohibition?
‘Dura lex, sed lex.’
Translation needed?
Don't you worry, buddy, Latin is a bro from our neighborhood.

Yet the vulgarity! The baseness of the theme: ‘portwein', ‘a bottle', flat as a pancake. 
Then what? Respect the art of hammerers. Folklore. Next to iambic.
No iambi zombie talk, private. Or we’ll have you rotten with fatigues at dactyl.
Ha! Who're you? Self-taught good for nothing. Screw your loose screw first. The gourmand with fluffy chopsticks. ‘Ah, iambus is not yummy! May I have some choree with a sprinkle of trochee, please?' How about grayling under sherry? 
Hmm, yes. The chorees are dying out. Fucked, in fact, with unfriendly ecology. Swampy vistas are closing in – ‘warmly approving the saved reserves we will hold aloof the initiative of the plan in excess with a feeling of deep satisfaction ahead of the time with centners of running meters from a hectare of rolled metal.’
Feel free to start up the red book for all the elegant belles-lettres. Doomed. Not a chance for survival.
The golden days of muses engulfed in the abyss of past…

‘The wrath sing, goddess, of Peleus' son, Achilles...’
This single line of the hexameter calls for two square meters of footnotes so that the folks suckled and brought up with editorials would get it what exactly that Achilles guy wants of the Brazilian football star’s kid.
But the paper deficit! We need it for printing about the growth of wealth and well-being!
You know the truth: if you want to live but there is no one to live with, you have to live with anyone you come across.
That’s why people adore folklore.
The perfection itself, mind you, can be found among those handcrafted items. Here, for your consideration:
‘It is the last time I ask you, bastards, who dared call God a rasp?!!’

In the dark, already slightly graying,  over the deserted road sounded a snort of a restrained chuckle.
The black clot of a tree floated up along the roadside and fell back.

However, they have schooled you in full.
Who’s around to look back at your causeless laugh?
"I walk keep smiling to myself and at the thought "what would they think of me?" I into laughter burst..." 
Another craft by the neighborhood folks?
No, it’s by some Czech with a shift to poetry.
You mean, Czechs are not folks? I’ll have your throat cut!
Have mercy, oh, Abraham! Check the bush maybe we’ll have a square deal – meal for Jehovah and your son unscratched.
And if I am Taras Bulba? 
Oh, yes! In the dried form, pressed for the herbariums. Robinson Crusoe’s goat is more of a Cossack than you. Shut up or the nanny-goat will die of laughter.

Really? But they said that laughter was the monopoly property of Khoma Sapiensoff.
Well, from the standpoint of physiology all is radiant clear – spasms and coughs tremendously benign to health. But what’s the meaning from the sense’s point of view?
Let’s have a look. Where are the decent people laughing? In the specially designated places. There look for an answer. In a circus, say, or…

Right! To the movies, we are going! 
That’s a comedy! Fantozzi a good fellow! Wow! Knows his trade!
Bang! Ding! Plop! Chink! Pisssssss…..
Glee and guffaw, giggling, laughing beyond all limits past all bounds.
Boo-ooh-ha! Ha-ho-ho! Gu-gu-hu! Wu-hu-hu!
And only my neighbor next to the left, a lady of immense proportions, sits listless, silent. 
Why? Napping or what? No, her gaze on the silver screen, yet no reaction!
The man there tries to stir her up with a run to hit his head against the lamppost.
The hall reported with a joyful volley.
And she? Good news she’s not yawning.
But what’s that? Unbelievable! On a minor episode, where Fantozzi, after another fall, plop, splash, whiz changes in a suit five times bigger his size and the public almost do not react, exhausted in the previous convulsions, from the exorbitant volumes of my neighbor rolls out the laughter of the same dimensions.
That’s the comedian! But how did he get her?
And now, when asked: why do people laugh? I answer – because of fear.
Fear?

Exactly! What’s more fearful for a woman than uglifying clothes?
But when the comedian's bicycle all of a sudden lost its saddle and he landed with his asshole onto the pipe left sticking up there the hall was shacking with the males' guffaw. 
A woman, in fact, won’t be frightened with such a trifle.

Nonsense! Laughter from fear!
 When scared, they run but not laugh. Besides, you smart arguments are based on the laughter of the base level. But people laugh because of not only that someone stumbled-slipped-sprawled-fell-into-drains, they laugh at witticisms as well. Then, there are still epigrams. Lots of causes to have a laugh. 
 
Verily, verily, I say unto you! Laughter comes from fear and is a request and a prayer addressed to the Unknown so that such a thing does not happen with them who's praying, I mean, laughing. 
The same underlying reason has the laughter caused by the finest witticisms.
Here, ‘ha-ha-ha’ means: ‘let me never be a target of such a joke!’
And laughing at oneself is a prayer: ‘let I never again step into it!’
They are inseparable Siamese – fear, and laughter. 
Tell me what you laugh at and I’ll say what you are afraid of!

So, Fool, you mean to say that someone who never laughs, is not afraid of anything?
You Majesty! We are not discussing anomalies, our subject matter is a representative of the class of vertebrates, the subclass of mammals, the species of primates, the subspecies of anthropoid with the Latin name ‘homo sapiens.' 
So don’t f-f.. fret our brains.

But look, then it turns out that by means of jokes you can learn…
Aha! Started getting it? Excellent. On we go! And here, by the way, a kilometer post.
What does it tell? No, I cant make out, it’s still dark.

Well, to hell! Let it be. It's not the first neither the last. Stop molesting orphan ones! Do you need it? Yomp your way. 
Oh, I’m sorry. No crooked tricks or dirty intent, I swear. Once again, please, forgive. Have a nice stay…

Hmm… So, what were we about?
A, well, of course! Considering the immortal question of the classic: ‘What are you laughing at?’
The answer is: at something that we fear to learn firsthand.
What is the forerunner of laughter?
That’s right – a smile.
And what is the smile? 
Right again – the show of teeth.
Let's say we meet each other at the lowest rungs of the evolutionary ladder. So I don't know what kind of stegosaurus you are, and you suspect me of being lungfishy. At that uneducated period, we roamed without passports. 
So, we meet and – first and foremost – what?. 
That's right! We bare our teeth. Say, look what I have, in case of you allow you excessive liberties. 
See, where all these laugh-hiccups and giggle-spasms spring from?

In its elementary basis, laughter is a means of self-defense with a Hegelian dual function – to scare away and to pray.
It is used, however, not in case of a real danger (it’s not the time for giggling) but when the threat is imaginary.
It is not applied in the absence of threat, or imagination, or when there is nothing to protect.
Using its monopoly on the above weapon, a man climbed up to the top of the mentioned ladder where they issue passports and enroll those who wish to the gyms where they teach kickboxing.
Amen.

Wow! It’s time to shout ‘eureka!’ and trot to the patent office.

Why, silly? It’s been a long time since all the wheels were reinvented.
Any supernova idea was brewing more than once in brains of a Chaldean priest, or a Greek sophist, a medieval alchemist, an Aztec knot-tier, a prophetic Brahman, or a Tibetan sage.
All discoveries and supergenius ideas are nothing more but an expression by means of other symbols or words the same truths old as the hills. 
Invariable, as the change of the seasons, phases of the moon, day and night. 
Every day is new and unique, every day is a repetition of myriad lots of exactly same days…

Beautifully wrapped, smartie. Yet, there’s a question from the audience: did you fix it firm enough, citizen?

No fear, marijuanisto! Nailed deeper than your… or is there a reasonable ‘bitter but’?

Uh-oh, alas, but, yes.
Where do you – in your shebang – place the smile of a two-month-old baby?
What is it afraid of when smiling to its mother, nenka, mutter or whatever?
That toothless smile seems to flash all you mental feasts straight down the drain.
Ain’t it, Mr. Brilliant Kid?

It’s dawning.
Murky-gray ceiling lay on the endless walls of hazy trunks, entangled with a mesh of hunger-black branches and twigs with occasional stains of tin-withered leaves.
Along the shredded asphalt, the comets of tiny shards of snow are rushing, snaking, drifting off their orbits, whirling the thin streams of dry powder snow.
The wind is favorable. From behind. So blow, buddy, blow!
Like hell, you will blow through the padded jacket presented by my aunt.
The head is tightly covered with a knitted hat of the ‘cock’ type.
The feet in sturdy soldier's shoes, in two pairs of socks. 

The road, whipped with snow streams, stretches to the horizon merging with infinity.
Blow, the curly one! Already Greeks knew that it’s easier to march under the flute playing.
Sturdy rig, firm road, what else is needed for happiness?
The forest belt parted letting a country road to fork off the roadway.
Through the gap peeped a surprised field: who’s so happy here?

And because of that field, and that there was a road ahead, and that the morning was so gloomy, and because the pale-transparent smoke of the white snow streaming with the wind, an unrestrained sudden joy, and uncontrollable delight welled up the throat, rushed and splashed out a cry into the confused desert: 
‘I! Am! Happy!’
The grainy snow whipping along the asphalt repeated, like a mirror, the whirlwind spiraling of clouds scudding low overhead.
‘Am! Happy!’ This time for some reason with a threat and a little questioningly.
‘Happy!’ That one sounded already sad.

Yes. The music played but shortly. Where are you, happiness? Only in the past or in the future. Elusive illusion.
And when coming across its tiny speck I’m always alone. Why so? It even hurts.
Now, if she were by. Though she needs no hiking marches.
Or if she saw on screen, in a dream, anywhere – this very morning, and this crippled road, a solitary traveler along…

Idiot! Will you ever get it? Stupid wretch!
There is no ‘she’ in existence but only indistinct sentimental driveling dreams of yours, unclear even to you, moron.
Dreams of an unimaginable mixture of heavenly beauty with a passion for pleasures of the most earthly nature, a combination of a cold-sharp mind with a tenderly fervent vagina craving for you only. 
Shut your lusty gape, kiddo. You’ve built a bridge atop a mountain and you’re waiting for a river to run under it.
And besides, for to get some anything you need to give somewhat something.
And what, if I’m kindly allowed to ask, do you have to offer?
So sharp and dandy padded jacket? Wow, yes, a practical thing. And being worn for just a week, no more. 
What? You even have got money? Fifty rubles?! That's a jackpot! 
Now, subtract a tenner for the bus ticket to Moscow, then twenty-five for a flight to Kiev, and a fiver for the local train from there. 
And don’t forget the havvage expenses. 
So for what reason are you to be loved with crazy passions?
Now, wipe your snots and just keep walking. Some business you’re a specialist in.

And he walked, stepping on the tails of the transparent bands of scampering grains of snow.
Each step was no different from the previous one, not any step changed a jot of the road; neither the low leaden sky nor the forest belts on both sides got changed. 
All and the same. That same all. Everything moves and stays the same.

Occasionally, the concrete kilometer posts with figures on blue tins were approaching and falling behind.
A few hours in a row of walking so, even with no burden, and the pain, though light but the nagging, would sip into the shoulder bones. 
He knew that. 
But not that day. 
The district center was fifteen kilometers from the village, so said his uncle. 
And from there started the transport services of a developed civilization.

Something loomed at a distance on the roadside.
Some massive thing.
Fixing his gaze on on that motionless strangeness midst the general chaotic stirring he was approaching along with tries at guessing: what could it be?
Some machinery.
Aha. What kind of it?
Who knows, they tinkle out lots of them for agriculture. 
Let's get closer and…
A slight burning sensation stirred in his bladder.
Would you but wait a bit with your urges?
Exactly, machinery, yet from another sphere...

He stopped at a tangerine-yellow road roller.
How could you possibly get to it, poor thing? Feels chilly, eh? That's it. Too accustomed to asphalt tropics. Bituminous heat and all that. 
How do you plan to survive the wither? You can't fly to warmer countries, too heavy on the rise. And it's too late anyway. 
And no gadget to dig you a furrow with. Not your profile. 
The only chance is anabiosis. Freeze into the surrounding environment, like them those cold-blood earth-water animals. Although not a bed of roses too.
He poured his sympathy out onto the scattering of small rubble. 
Zipped up the fly.
Stepped over the uneven dark spot on the road, an hour or two earlier it was the tea prepared by Uncle’s wife for a meal.
Everything flows, everything changes. One and the same tea cannot be poured out twice.

It was his second visit to the village where he was now walking from.
The first time though he had not come himself but was brought there.

The days of that summer lasted forever, unhurried, like the slow stream dividing the village into ours and theirs.
A quiet creek rolling soundlessly along the sandy bottom. The water was knee-deep.
A little upstream you got into the green-shaded tunnel between the walls of dense willows.
Whitebait brushed tickling against the shanks.

It feels creepy especially when you are twelve and they told you some scary stories about leeches and ‘horse hair’.
And behind the village, quite at a distance, maybe at an hour’s walk, there was the river Mostya.
Not too wide but you could have a swim.
And he was swimming to the bright grassy bank and pushing the red-and-blue ball on the water, glancing at the light spot of his face reflected in the wet, spinning sides of the ball.
Or was that ball and the grassy bank at another river of his childhood?
But the fact remained that he entered the Mostya river as well.
Twenty years before...

Twenty years later, on his second visit, he did not enter it.
It was too cold for swimming. Late autumn.
Emptiness reigned in the widely spread waves of the fields.
Empty was the village.
Small hillocks of broken bricks – ruins of houses overgrown with rank grass.
After Khan Mamai’s horde had passed.
The remaining ones were silent, squatting lowly as if pressed down by the ocean of the faded sky. 
The Marianas Trench.

‘You to whom?’
‘To Sehrguey Mikhailovich Ogoltsoff.’
‘And who are you?’
‘Sehguey Ogoltsoff.’
‘So, the nephew?’ guessed she quickly.
‘Exactly.’ he agreed, holding back his smile.
She invited to pass into the room, and was sorry for the uncle having just left for work after the break, praised the scrawny cat who in the morning predicted the visit of guests by thoroughly washing its face and returned to the kitchen with the large Russian oven and slow ticking of weight-driven clock on the wall, to the table covered with old oil-cloth above the plywood doors of its box, under persistent stares from the silent crowd of differently sized photos in the corner between two windows.

He sat leaning against the backrest of the couch, under an arched window to the front garden, examining the interior of a single room with a brick stove in front of him from which a smooth gray pipe of asbestos-concrete rose up and by the ceiling deflected to the kitchen wall.
At the opposite wall, next to the stove, stood a broad bed with paint-coated legs and backs, with a pyramidal tower of cushions by the plush carpet stretched on the wall with small nails, where, in one of the thousand-and-one nights, the young man abducted a beauty on his plush horse, and the accomplice followed him, glancing back at the minarets of the sleeping city. 
In the corner of the room, a brown wardrobe was waiting for their arrival. 

On this side, next to the couch, stood a table under the second of arched windows, with chairs pushed under it and, by the blank wall to the neighbors, a television set on a high shelf.
From under the TV to the kitchen door a rug-mat stretched in the same directions with planks of the ceiling overhead, naked and blue.
She tinkled plates washing them up in the kitchen, occasionally coming to the door of the room to ask if his parents were healthy, and where he worked, and what’s his job.

By the cautiousness of the questions, he understood, that she knew. 
As if it could be otherwise.
His father, since retired, was visiting his native village almost every summer, bringing his granddaughter along.
He surely had been sharing his troubles with his brother.
In the kitchen, the front door banged:
‘Grandma! Two fives!’
‘You've come?’ responded she with tender strictness. ‘Take off your jacket. And do not shuffle that way. Go say hello to the uncle (to his whispered question) your mom’s cousin.’
From behind the door handle, the boy’s face with a strand of hair sticking up in a cow-lick above the right corner of the steep forehead slowly peeped out with the childishly serious look.
After a prolonged ‘hello-oo' he disappeared to go on with the inaudible questioning of his grandmother. 
‘Lenochka’s dad,’ answered she laying the table. ‘Remember her staying at grandma Sasha’s last summer?’
She called the guest at the table.

Supping the meal, the schoolboy looked at the window with a detached stare.
Could you remember what they see with such wide-open gaze those seven-year-old aliens until another question about school brings them back to their senses?
Well, at least the unknown uncle from nowhere was eating silently.
The boiled potatoes with fried onions the boy rejected as well as the tea.
The grandmother sent him to the village smithy to tell his grandfather about the guest who with polite thank-you returned to the couch.

He sat full of lean satiety in dense silence wrapping the house.
Outside the two windows, the gray wind cooed and wooed with impetuous gusts the apple tree in the front garden who angrily waved away the inconstant any lady's man. 
It’s time to insert the inner frames for winter.
On the opposite side, through the lilac-velvet night, the kidnappers were still galloping silently with their prey. 
Although she seemed happy to be stolen and not to got by old vizier with his fat eunuchs... 

It’s weird, the extent of how everything around was befitting me.
And so it would be on all other days of the vacation.

In the evenings I’d be visiting my aunt Alexandra to overeat her pancakes, and once even a chicken.
A rich villager.
In the mornings after the breakfast when my uncle the blacksmith would go by bicycle to his smithy I started to roam over the fields and after the midday meal cut logs from the hillock of firewood dumped next to the house for the winter.
A beautiful Russian woman Valentina, of her husband's last name – Zhelezina, my cousin and the mother of Maxim the outstanding student living in the house of his grandparents, would invite me to visiting her house, where she kept the younger ones – the hooligan Volodka and post-toddler Tanyushka who still did not wanted to part with the pacifier.
She would tell me the village stories and about her life in Moscow where she was courted by a Frenchman and in Kustanai, where she was married to a German from the local colonists.

Her current husband would take me to the village store and I would drink bottled beer and listen to mujiks’ talk of nothing but with so native intonations that it takes your breath away with sentimental sympathy.
And by that time my aunt would have already given me her present of a black padded jacket, which was the must wear for anyone there except for kids and teenagers so that I did not stick out like a sore thumb in my checkered jacket. 
The ante-biblical simplicity of life and at the same time with so many admixtures. 

An old woman came to the store to exchange potatoes from her garden for kolkhoz kopecks, her utter misery shows through but the mujiks are next to bowing before her caps in hand.
She is a relic of their past – the embodiment of the old-regime landowners, but they need that relic and would create it from a poor retired teacher if only her facial features were delicate enough.

Returning from one of the supper evenings at my aunt's, I for some reason stopped at nothing and stared in the dry tall grass for a long time. 
What for?
The next evening my aunt answered me that, yes, my grandmother Martha’s hut stood exactly in that spot.

On the last night before leaving, I came with the farewell visit to Valentina’s house.
My checkered jacket turned out exactly her husband's size, they were obviously impressed with such generosity and were calling the jacket ‘a suit’.
To Valentina, I presented my suspiciously feminine bag. 
Finally, I managed to get rid of it. 

We went out into the darkness of the street without houses.
Everyone understood that we would never see each other again.
Valentina embraced me and wept.
I stroke the shoulder of her padded jacket and said:
‘Boodya, sister.’
Then I shook hands with her husband Zhelezin and went away.
So strange.
In my whole life, I never heard or used that soothing word of ‘boodya’; it came all of itself.

I come from here; it's a pity I will not be useful here...

People started making wry faces at me as early as the bus station near the Izmaylovo Park, where the Ryazan-Moscow bus arrived.
At Zhulyany airport in Kiev, where the airplane from Moscow landed at midnight, hostile attitude to me from the surrounding public increased geometrically to confirm the correctness of the old saying – people judge you by your zek outfit.
Public opinion on my account was voiced by a passenger on the platform of the underground subway station:
‘Where the fuck do you barge through among the people?’

My difference from them was in my being a black man.
The black padded jacket, black pants, black soldier shoes.
Only the ‘cock’ hat on my head fell out of the ensemble with its brown and blue stripes.
It would seem more or less forgivable if I were loaded with some kind of luggage, but a black man with his hands in his pockets – it’s outrage, it’s a challenge to the social order, it’s a cheeky bomzh...

We bypass them with an unseeing glance, so that—save, God!—avoid an eye contact, or we bark:
‘Where the fuck do you barge through among the people?’
True, in those days we did not know the word ‘bomzh’, for that sort of people they used the term ‘bich’ then.
‘Where do you barge, you bich?.. Get out of here, fucking bich!’

The word was brought by the seamen who went abroad.
There, in the port cities, those who spent the nights on the beach and pick up the scraps and offal left by vacationers were called ‘beach-combers'. 
Our people did not bother and borrowed only the first half of that word.

So the people without a certain place of residence and with obscure occupation began to be called ‘biches’.
A short, biting term. However, it died out.
Firstly, those who did not speak English and never went to sea began to slip into synonyms substituting ‘knoot’ (which in Russian means ‘whip’) for ‘bich’ that in Russian also means ‘whip’.
And secondly, the abbreviation is always stronger, especially with the support of the state

(….we are all from the USSR, got it?
Whoever does not understand will receive clarification in the CheKa, aka the KGB…)

When the law enforcement organs abbreviated the ‘without a certain place of residence’ which in Russian becomes BOMZh, other terms had no chances.
In the great and mighty Russian language, you can't find a synonym for ‘bomzh'. 
The nearest to it ‘tramp’ or ‘bum’ smack of mothballs and infantile lisp of Indian cinema.

Once upon a time in Russia lived peddlers, aka offenny.
In order to survive, they invented a language of their own.
Dark for uninitiated, the Offenny language went into oblivion together with its carriers – no one had bothered to compose its dictionary.
The current ‘fenya’ of the criminal world is also for initiated but has nothing to do with the Offenny except for echoing the latter's name.
Considering ‘fenya’ the language of Russian mafia is not correct because it borrowed from Russian only grammatical structures.
Its vocabulary is fairly international.
Kicked out of secondary school, half-educated students continuing their careers in prison poured in 'fenya' the bits and scraps of words they heard in foreign language lessons.
That way ‘fenya' feathered its hat with ‘atas!' (from the French ‘atasion!'), ‘haza' (from German ‘Hause'), ‘havat' (from English ‘have a'), and borrowings from the languages in the family of friendly and free brother nations fused into common the USSR. 

(...however, back to my ‘malyava’, aka letter (from German ‘mahlen)…)

The protector of the public foundations who offended me in the subway had no notion that under the appearance of a black man there lurked a vulnerable soul in me and the digestive tract of a delicate organization. 
I myself did not suspect it until felt that after the mentioned insult I gradually became ‘mournful with the belly'. 
In the area of the Maidan, the then October Square, it became clear that I could not hold back the pressure of the tides storming the ampoule (following the large intestine) and leaving no hope to reach the greens by the University with the only public toilet I knew in the central part of Kiev.

Fortunately, I remembered the Ministry of Education with their ministerial toilet on the second floor.
And not too far from the square. 
Only the internal intense rioting called for more suppression efforts. 

I flung the tall entrance door open and rushed in a concentrated jog up the marble stairs.
‘Hey! Where?’ shouted the attendant from the chair to the left of the entrance.
'Check of the plumbing equipment,' answered I over the shoulder, without slowing down the businesslike strides. 

When all the sorrows subsided, I left the restroom, polished like a malachite jewelry case, and descended the white wide stairs, like the archangel Gabriel – slowly and blissfully shining.
I wanted to share the Good News and, turning my face to the attendant, informed benevolently:
‘Look! The check proved all's okay. Yes.’
And I went out into the blatantly atheistic the Karl Marx street, made up of a dense wall of the similar severely administrative buildings. 

(...Karl certainly knew it was partaking in the collective that helped Man to become the crown of nature.
Because of single-handed you can’t neither kill a mammoth not fly to the moon.
But how fragile the state of unity is!.
With what willingness do we divide ourselves, humans, by the color of skin and hair, by caste, faith, party affiliation: they are not us, we are not them, we are one ruble more expensive.

Some impenetrable mystery – how a herd of the ape-shaped boobs keeps able for collective efforts with its chronic inclination to self-castration?..)

The visit to Kanino awakened in me the growth of national self-awareness.
To me, a descendant of Novgorodian ushkuynik robbers and Tatar raiders, who for centuries, in turn, were raping Ryazan women, it was not appropriate, but even disgraceful to all day long give the stinking rags my hugs to stuff them into the press box. 
So, for the first time in my working career, I applied for firing me on the strength of my own free will. 

Now, in my workbook, the disparaging Article 40 was shoved behind by the completely acceptable standard record ‘dismissed on the application’ and I went to hire on in the KaPeVeRrZe Plant.
Everything went without a hitch, I had smoothly past the medical checks but at the very last moment in the personnel department I suddenly heard ‘no go’.
Why not?

It turned out, there had remained no quota for me.
The head of the personnel department exposed it in detail, that there were an unadvertised but strict regulations forbidding to hire a person with higher education among less than 1000 workmen without diplomas. 
In the plant collective of 5000 employees, there was not an extra thousand to allow for my case. 
Some sons of a bitch with diplomas arrived before me and the quota was over. 

(...the disappointment did not kill me, I somehow used to cope with falling through, nevertheless, it was a significant shock to realize the existence of the ‘shadow' legislation ignorance of which did not exempt from its being applied to you…) 

Then I went to the city outskirts opposite the Settlement, to the plant of ‘Motordetail’ where I was hired on as a bricklayer in the Construction Shop Floor.
The bastards with diplomas had not yet infiltrated the large modern enterprise.

With the exclusion of the havvage in its canteen, the plant ‘Motordetail' stood out as a crystal dream and a model of an industrial enterprise. 
Just a passing look at its construction shop was enough to agree with the statement.
The spacious locker rooms were culturally tiled and paneled in brown colors of the spectrum, and they were combined with as spacious and also tiled shower rooms.
Recollection of the said conveniences waiting for you at the end of the day would warm your heart during the working hours. 

I knew my job and was applied as a bricklayer-loner for non-standard tasks in separate places.
They equipped me with a pair of helpers to bring bricks and mortar and – forward! – to panel the underground water well with a circular wall, or laying the chimneys on roofs of two-apartment cottages. 

I liked the frequent change of tasks: each required a special approach and circumspection which keeps our mind from slipping into sloth and our backbone from getting stiff.
And for the periods of calm between the missions I was sent to the team of bricklayers constructing the 130-apartment block for the plant employees.
The team was not aces, but they would live in what they had built. 

Neither in the locker room not with the team I was not a conversationalist you’d dream about.
When asked something, I would reply and then again keep silent.
I was talking to myself in my mind.
My helpers were often changed.
Their rotation was seen to by Narcological Department 2, aka Narco-2.
Narco-2 constituted a crucial part of the conveyor production of slaves. 

Slaves in the epoch of Developed Socialism?
Do not forget the spiral-like advancing of the historical progress.

The system worked as follows: 
a militia van rushes into a village and grabs a pair of mujiks whom the village council chairman had indicated as prone to alcohol consumption.
(And who is not?)
The catch is brought to Narco-2 for treatment of alcoholism.
Anyone entertaining a too high opinion of his human rights gets a shot of sulfur and until the end of the treatment, he no longer takes risks to discuss the subject. 
The treatment term is from two to three months. 
The patients live in the hostel, eat their havvage in the canteen, work wherever they would send them.
NO PAYMENT FOR THEIR WORK.
All earned by them is taken as reimbursement for accommodation, havvage, and medical care. 
The medical care is the pills dispensed to the patients after the working day which they immediately flush down the toilet. 
When keeping a low profile they are allowed to visit their villages on the weekends.

In the city, the start of the procedure is simplified. 
The precinct militia officer announces to the drunks of his beat who is the next to go for treatment and they know it’s better to fall in line.

The Great October Revolution proclaimed among its aims effacing the differences between town and country...

Each person certainly has their own story and if you keep quiet and don't interrupt with attempts at narration of your own, they will eventually tell theirs to you. 
Not necessarily about themselves, maybe about a relative or a neighbor.

For example about a German from a squad occupying a village hutta.
Each morning he yelled something to which his comrades responded with laughter.
One of them had a little Russian and explained to the landlady the content of his yells: 
‘Gimme those two bitches – Hitler and Stalin, I’ll give them short shrift with my Schmeisser!’
The story was told me by an old woman preparing to retire from the construction shop floor, who, as a small girl, saw Germans living in her mom's hutta. 

(...the question is for how long they would tolerate such an entertainer in the Red Army?..)

Or about a mujik who made friends with a stranger in a beer bar.
They went out together and strolled along the street until the new acquaintance had an urge to loosen his bowels.
He dropped in a nearby yard with a promise to be back in a moment.
He urinated there and then wanted to nick a carpet from the linen rope and was arrested.
So was the mujik standing on the sidewalk who got four years of imprisonment as the accomplice.
Yes, there still occurred some happenstance mistakes in the most human judicial system of the world... 

And the executioner was proud to tell his story.
Actually, he considered himself a hero, not an executioner.
He served at the front Smersh battalion mopping up the areas taken control of and when they captured an RLA soldier he personally and heroically took the traitor to a nearby forest. 
Although at the headquarters there was a special platoon with sub-machine guns for the purpose.
So they two walked there arm in arm, only the hands of one in the pair were tied on his back.
And on the way, he began a casual talk about the family and kids. 
So that some of the captives even started to hope for something.
And then he said:
‘Why do you, bitch, betrayed our motherland?’
And he shot his TT pistol, not to kill, though, but make a hole in the liver with his bullet so that the bastard wriggled for ten minutes before dying of the lethal wound.

After the war, he wanted to be a diplomat, but they explained to him that a Soviet diplomat being an embodiment of our motherland abroad should be flawless. 
Unfortunately, his body was missing three fingers cut off by a bomb fragment when already in Germany.
That's why he had to enter an institute for economics and get the diploma of a middle-rank manager. 

I slightly knew his son who was always ready with slogans like ‘we’ll not allow the enemy to trample our native land!’
He apparently inherited his dad’s ideology...

In Konotop the ideology was hardly ever looked at from a respectful perspective.
And in the heat of an argument folks did not choose some high-flown words.
Thus, for example, to upbraid a female, they would say: 
‘You are a Nyusya Kamenetskaya!’

Nyusya was a city idiot.
She silently walked the sidewalks, no one addressed her and she addressed no one because she was a quiet case.
But you could see with one look at her hat, that she was an idiot.
Sort of a red bonnet with a bouquet of artificial flowers.
By that bonnet, she was recognized from afar and small kids in the street would run after her and shout: 
‘Nyusya Kamenetskaya!’
But she did not reply and walked silently on.
A casual city idiot.

The executioner’s son murdered her.
Late in the evening in the Loony park.
He did not want the motherland to be trampled by quiet idiots. 
Lyalka had to see the purist off in the grated ‘stolypin’ car from the railway station.
Because of to make sure that the likes of Nyusya would never dare anymore infest the sacred sidewalks of motherland that son of the Smersh hero…

(...shut up!
Certain thing needn't ever be told even to grown-up children!..) 

I don't know why, but some of the stories are darker than all the thousand and one night put together… 

But even in the tragic layouts there always are nooks for optimism!

In that winter the frost was reaching absolutes.
Walking along the street you could hear some tender clink in the head – that were your thoughts turned to ice in the brain and tinkling against the convolutions walls. 
And smack in the middle of that pole of cold, you came across an announcement at the plant Checkpoint entrance: "Those wishing to partake in a ski trip to the Seim apply at the tourism group."
Haven't I told it was a very modern and advanced plant? 
In the basement of one of the five-story apartment blocks in the Plant area, I was once making a screed for rubber covering of a stadium for mini football... 

I found the room of the tourism group.
They said: on Saturday, at the Checkpoint entrance, with own skis. 
I brought my skis, the ones I was running in the forest of the Object.
There was a bus at the Checkpoint entrance for those who did not feel like skiing that morning. 

Nonetheless, there were three volunteers to ski all the 12 kilometers.
Some girl with a guy courting her, and I.
The ski-track in the deep snow was being made in turn.
But what a beauty!
Especially when we entered the forest.
Because of the frost, the snow became as fine as flower and the sun sparkled in each of those tiny crystals.
The other two skiers knew the location of the plant recreation camp, but I saw it for the first time.

The houses made of wood had steep gable roofs, like in the Swiss Alps.
The whole forest around drowned in the snow and only the roofs stuck out because of their steepness. Class!

My room was just under the roof and from inside I could again admire how steep it was.
It was a room for two and my roommate turned out one of the veteran tourists, not a novice like me. 

I understood that their group was sort of closed shop at the plant and the advertisement was just to show to the management that they were actively attracting the masses.
They did not expect there would turn up a curious villager of me.

On the other hand, he got a fresh listener for his stories about their hiking in the Urals where all week long they walked in the rain. 
From morning till night.
Yet afterward, in every outing that he was taking part, there was not even a drizzle. 
That’s why in the tourism group they nicknamed him ‘dry talisman’.
Whenever they went without him they got soaked through with the rain and quite the opposite with his participation.

Then he left and returned with a bottle of the medicine alcohol,
He poured me a full glass and measured out twenty drops for himself.
We drank and had a snack with the sandwiches he had brought.
Then he went away and from the first floor came the sounds of music.
Understanding that the free medicine alcohol was a means to switch me off so that I did not mess around with the group's cultural program, I lay down on the bed. 
However, I noticed that the steep roof was in the state of too active waving and for that reason I got up and went downstairs.

They arranged a quick dance in the hall.
The light was turned off and only colored lamps were blinking rhythmically.
I also hopped for a while in their circle.
Then I moved to the next room.
The light there was on and along the walls there sat ladies of non-skiing age, probably, the tourists’ mothers from the bus.
In the center stood a six-pocket billiards table.
Dry talisman was fooling around rolling the balls before the mothers.
He was surprised to see me up but gave me the cue when I asked.
Believe it or not, but with three biting strikes, I send three balls into the pockets. 
Even I myself was stunned because I never really played billiards.

I stopped at that, returned the cue and went out into the yard.

The darkness around was dark as in the middle of the forest cut with the light from the windows and high fire in the barbecue to make coals for meat processing.
Not one alive soul was around.
I went up to the fire, looked at the flames and felt blues – everyone was like everyone else and only I was such a slice forlorn and clear-cut. 
And the blues drove my intoxication away, I went up into the room and fell asleep because of the grief...

And in the summer I discovered the existence of Game, with the capital letter. 
There was a football match between the plant team and a visiting one in the ‘Avangard’ stadium in the Central Park.
It attracted an audience of some twenty cut-off slices like me who hadn’t a f-f.. frolic to do, and two or three random drunks.

So, the teams got out to the center, the referee, the coin toss, all that.
They started the game, sort off.
But what would you want?
Factory teams, their trade committees had bought them trunks and leggings but no outfit would hide the fact that mujiks were far over their thirties.
Maybe some fifteen years before a pair of them attended the Youth Sports School volleyball section, that’s all their training.
And the field really big indeed – the standard football field.
While a poor bastard jogged from one end of it to the other he became a sore sight with his tongue hanging out and over the shoulder.
You couldn’t but feel pity for the guy.
But since I came to the match I sat there, what’s the difference when you don't have a.. anything else to do.
No use of carping.

And suddenly the tall poplars in the dense row behind the empty opposite stands stirred and rustled…
Like the breath of an invisible giant flew over them.

But all that had already become unimportant because of that on the field there unexpectedly was unfolding such a game for which you were all leaning forward, clutching the planks of the bench under you and turning your head from side to side to follow the ball rocketing around the field dissecting the air by its flight like a white cannonball which was not allowed to ever touch the ground..
Midfielder soared up a half-meter above his own height to pass the ball to the right striker who, one-touch, sent it to the center.
The center striker cleverly caught the pass, kicked the ball over the defender, easily bypassed him and what a mighty strike!
The–from no way to guess where and how emerged–left midfielder intercepted the ball and sent it far away to the center of the field where at once they kick up a skirmish to get it…
We watched spell-bound closely following the ricochets of the ball from one team to another, getting accelerated with each hit of a leg, or a head, or a chest… 
It was not them who played the game, it was the game who played with them.
It was Game. 

Finally, even the drunks realized that something unprecedented was happening on the field.
They roared and whistled like a hundred-thousand crowd went mad in the stands.
Probably, that shooed off the invisible.

The players, one by one began to shirk and soon they just jogged around in their soaked through T-shirts… 

I am not too much of a football fan, yet now I am convinced that there is a real Game in existence.

(...five minutes of Game, is it not enough?
Fans of renown clubs might have seen more, but in bits, not at a stretch, poor homeopaths.

Yes, that Game was gone, dissolved, raced away like a gust of wind, like a burst of happiness, but it was there and it still fascinates me…)

The reason for my keeping silent was that I had bitten my tongue.
At first, I let it enjoy all the freedom of speech it wanted, but a month after my getting a job there was a general meeting of the construction shop floor workmen attended by a representative of the management of the ‘Motordetail’.
There was an unmistakable air of a leader about that guy of a representative.
You can’t imagine such an individual as a child with a balloon, or a youth frustrated with his acne.
No go.
He came from his mother’s womb ready-made, just like that – half-bold, wearing glasses, with hanging stomach and the well-bred stateliness.

In his speech before the meeting, he outlined the tasks facing us in so a crucial period of the acceleration. 
It was the time for everyone to work harder at their workplaces, we, the workmen, at different construction sites, they, the management, at their posts, steering our engagement and activities to achieve the set goals.
He finished and the meeting chairman asked if there were any questions.
I raised my hand.

(...it was a breach of unadvertised rules, by which the question about questions was closing any meeting.
However, I raised my hand because he really put my back up that nightingale from the plant management…)

I asked to explain the difference between the ‘engagement’ and ‘activities’ I was really curious. Thank you.

The management representative whispered something to the meeting chairman and the latter announced the meeting closed. 
The participants, with relief, hurried to their homes.

A couple of days later a guy from the village of Bochky who was coming to work by motorcycle entered the locker room with his round biker helmet under his armpit, like an astronaut on the launch pad, and announced his intention to change the lock in his locker because of schizophrenics walking around the room. 
He did not address to or point at anyone specifically, but most of the present mujiks turned their heads in my direction. 
That’s why I had bitten my tongue

(...you can't kick against so mighty levers of power with their arsenal of unadvertised regulations, elusive omnipresence, and superb pedagogical skills – they even managed to teach the ‘schizophrenic' word to a moron from Bochky…) 

‘You been to Romny?’
Here, in the bathing hall of the Konotop bathhouse filled with clouds of steam, the noise of water rushing from taps, the clank of tin basins against marble tops of low tables, each of us looked like an ‘irrevocably free' from the Area of the fifth unit in the regional psychiatric hospital. 
‘I've been in Romny, but I cannot remember you.' 
Even I myself admired the impeccability of the poetic rhythm of my answer.

The neighbors stopped rubbing soap in their sponges and, pricking up their ears moved closer – the Konotopers had an innate propensity for poetry.

I continued to stare at the inquirer.
The accordion groans over the evening Area… it's getting dark… soon to go up for the night… these eyes… those same eyes only without the oily blueness over the iris… 
‘Volodya!’
The neighbors pulled back.
Some of them grabbing the tin basins move over to other tables.
I love the Konotopers’ polite understanding, they never want to be in the way of intimate developments…

How could I not recognize him right away?
One of us three who were sharing two beds.
He smiled confusedly.
The absence of that quirk in his eye put me off the track at first… 

(...it’s not the glassy-eyedness, it’s just like a thin film floating over the eyes.
Exactly the same steely-bluish filming I saw in the eyes of the inhabitants of the Azeri village of Krkchyan when they arrested me on the slope of a tumb taking for an Armenian spy.
In fact, I was just picking blackberry there, aka mosh, aka ozhina…)

By official version, the Karabakh war lasted for three years, 1992 – 1994, but, in fact, it started much earlier and hasn’t ended yet.
On the third (in the unofficial estimation) year of the war, when I stopped to like the expression in Satenic’s eyes, I made an attempt at evacuating her from the theater of war.
By a strange coincidence she, together with Ashot and Ruzanna, got to 13 Decemberists, Konotop.

Imagine my surprise when, three months later, she confronted me with the fact of her return with the children.
I had to fly to Yerevan to meet them at Zvartnots airport for the subsequent delivery, also by helicopter, to Stepanakert.

(...on their arrival day the city has not yet recovered from the shock of the death of 25 people killed by a single ‘Grad’ volley…)

Unfamiliar people in Yerevan, learning where we were going to, suggested to at least leave the children, Ashot and Ruzanna (in alphabetical order), by them. 

When we got to the apartment in Stepanakert which our friends were renting to us for free, I asked for the reason for so a quick return. 
‘I realized that living just for living’s sake is not worth the while.’

Here is a good example of the impact of the environment.
Take an Armenian woman, brought up in all the strictness of patriarchal-matriarchal way of life, let her live for three months in Konotop and she will come back without asking for a permission and philosophizing already, and she will start to give out wise maxims.
Hello! Please, receive and sign here…

But couldn’t that wisdom see that fearing for just yourself is easier that fearing for you plus those who you love?
Especially when the air alarm sirens start their wailing, or from the tumb of Camel Back thunder the shots of naval guns brought there from Caspian flotilla?
Not mentioning ‘Grad’ missiles that make no noise at all when on the fly to their final din-bang-crush and half the block is wiped off.
After all, we live in an age of high technologies.

(...and again I got washed off somewhere else.
I was talking about Romny, right?
And a madhouse and war are two big differences.
Or are they?..)

That all to elucidate the fact that, in general, I did not have time to acquaint Satenic with certain facts of my previous curriculum vitae, being busily waiting for a suitable occasion. 

And I was curious a bit: what information will she scoop up there.
During that evacuation period.
None.
The Konotopers do not rat on their own.

The only puncture happened in a conversation with a fellow employee.
(Satenic even got a job at the KEMZ plant when in the evacuation.)
Having learned that Satenic’s husband name was Ogoltsoff, the gossip said:
‘Hmm..’

Here, probably, and all of the compromising material leaked on me to the Transcaucasia from Konotop sources.

Yes, life kept rolling along the same rails – there was the bath, and the beach, and the calls from Twoic.
And I everywhere played my rolled-in role, but somehow I got already separated from everything, and from the systematized life, and from my part in it.
I became like that guy who, leaning on the fence around the children’s ground, like, watches the kids scurry about in the sandbox.
There’s Twoic, and the bosses with helpers, and I myself with my smoothed role, but I did not really care about all that fuss.

In the spring, Twoic called me to Nezhin to the institute student hostel, like, to kick up a party in the old days' style. 
I remember for sure that it was Thursday, a bath day, and, apparently a pre-holiday day, he would not call me in the middle of the week.
I took a towel and underwear for change and went to Nezhin, though there was no steam room in the hostel yet the shower still remained.

In the hostel lobby, auntie Dina was sitting on duty. 
She had not changed a single bit and, of course, she didn’t let me pass inside.
I asked a passer-by student to visit the room where, as arranged, Twoic already had to be waiting for my arrival, and tell him about the predicament.
He went upstairs and I had a discovery.

A young student entered the lobby from the hostel corridor wearing a crumpled dressing-gown and a sleepy face.
She did not give me any look, another one of casual visitors turning up in the hostel lobby, but just came up to the window nearby. 
I waited for Twoic or a message through which of the back side windows on the first floor I could climb in. 
I was not at all prepared that my body, without any command from me, or permission, would unexpectedly freak out and throw my right hand up and behind my head, raising my elbow up in the air.
Such a cheeky kink!

Was it triggered by the nearness of the common-looking girl with her face of not so well-kneaded dough? 
Or was that her crumpled dressing gown to hook me up so?
In any case, it was outrageous, moreover without any expressed demand!
That body of mine really went too far.
I, personally, did not intend any gestures!

And the cause of the mutiny aboard, a couple meters off me, was staring at the absolutely deserted landscape from the two-story canteen behind the gray glass of the window.
Some shocking discovery.

The messenger returned and said the door of the indicated room was locked.
Apparently, Twoic had already begun an old style shake-up of a complaisant chick. 

I went out of the hostel.
To be back in Konotop before the bath closing hour was just unthinkable. 
But it was a Thursday!
Okay, there remained the lake in the Count’s Park.
I headed there the shortest way.

A group of student lads was coming up along the same shortcut from the park in their sportswear. 
They reached the pipe from which Fedor and Yakov had once flopped into the water. 
There was no water anymore and the moat turned into a wide grassy ditch. 
One of them crossed it walking along the shaky pipe.

Wow! It seemed to become a student tradition!
So what?
Drumming myself in the chest and shouting ‘it’s me! I’m the legend! It’s been started by me!’?

In sad, elegiac mood I entered the park and strolled to the narrower part of the lake by the thickets in the deserted parts.
I undressed there and in the altogether went into the water.
Rubbing the soap all over myself, I threw it ashore and scrubbed the hand-reachable parts of the body.
Then, to wash the foam off, I churned along a little turning over in a screw-wise twirl before diving towards the shore.
White spits of foam remained on the black ripples.
The birth of Aphrodite.
The f-f.. frivolous Little Mermaid, thought I rubbing myself with the towel.
No, I’m not a pervert.
It, somehow, gets so all by itself and then just rolls on … in a progressive rotation spiral-wise ahead...

Lenochka entered the sewing school in the Sumy city and went there to study.
I did not have any reason to go on living at 13 Decemberists.
I found a place on the opposite outskirts of Konotop, closer to the ‘Motordetail’.

It was a summer kitchenette of 2×3 meters, in the yard of a hutta whose owner worked at the wastewater treatment plants where I once laid individual walls.
The kitchenette's brick stove under the low ceiling left room only for a bed and a desk by the window yet for me, it was enough. 

I only slept there and read books in German with a German-Russian dictionary of medical terms because there was not any other in the bookstore. 
The rent was only 15 rubles, but nevertheless, I finally stopped sending out the already irregular alimony transfers in two directions.

Deepening into German was needed for the final showdown with that old good Freud. 
As an attested schizophrenic with a certain store of experience in the field studies, I did not see any reason for his fixation on the symbolism of genitals.
Well, yes, a cigar may seem to look like a dick and the ashtray may have been associated with a vagina and so on and so forth. 
But what of it?
They got fixed to these interpretations and had no more progress than a stick in the mud.

(...I finally realized that Freud, in fact, is a storyteller, like, say, Hans Christian Andersen, they differ only in their stock of words.
Freud divides the Kingdom of consciousness into four parts (a good fellow Sigmund, that was a step forward from the Hegel’s triads):
the Duchy Consciousness;
the March Subconscious;
the Baronetcy Ego; and
the County Super-Ego.

Ah! How nice and beautiful!
There is so much of miraculous finesse, so much of poetry in them those tales!

Anyone has the right to a personal scientific theory, however, theories are checked by their practical results.

Based on the theory of his own concoction, Freud cured 12% of his patients.
They could have recovered on their own accord or were healed with the merciless road-roller of time changes, but we will give them to Freud as a reward for his merits – he had offered at least some gaudy oasis when the topic was as empty and stark naked as the arid desert.
Besides, he still inspires lots of artists dabbing vinaigrette from phalluses and vaginas…)

And in that kitchenette, the long-conceived plan got finally settled in my mind.
It was the time to leave Konotop.

