
In the first of the rooms, I once fainted for the first time in my life. 
Absolutely for no reason whatsoever.
Dark entered my eyes and I crept with my back against the wall down to the floor and sat there in the darkness around me.
But I did not shut off completely and heard the echo of distant voices explaining to each other that it was just faint. 
Then the light returned, I opened my eyes and went back to the line.

For those who couldn’t any longer keep in check their excretory system, a tin basin with handles was put on the floor tiles in the center of the actual toilet room.
When it got filled up some of the nuts would shovel with his hands the excrement into a separate pail and empty it into one of the toilet bowls, the remaining urine was poured out in a drainpipe in the corner.
There was some undefined time quota for squatting on the bowl, when it was up the nearest queue started to grumble and in a minute some deaf-mute nuts from the end of the line would pull you off the toilet without explaining the reasons.

After the breakfast, the toilet was locked until the end of lunch when they opened it briefly for washing the floor. 
The last chance to use the toilet was the half an hour after the dinner because of the final floor washing of the day.

The diffuse way of my previous life did not allow me to train my bladder strict enough for fitting that concise schedule.
Sensing the urge to take a leak, I fell into a panic that I could not stand it until the next half an hour of the open toilet. 
Appealing to paramedics in whose possession was the coveted key did not make sense because of the unchanging answer:
‘Piss off! You can’t use the toilet, the floor there is washed.’
So to avoid a warming up, explanatory hit over the head with the whole key bunch you had to conform and piss off. 

One day, driven to despair, I tried to take a leak into the sink on the end wall of the corridor and got on the ribs from the patient who often smoked there on the sly admiring the sink, like a park fountain being on repair.

During another crisis, overcoming shame, I turned to an elderly nurse with keys on her belt, trying to delicately explain my need and plight.
She couldn't understand for a long time my muttering about what I felt within my bladder but then opened the door to the shower and pointing to the trap ordered:
‘Puddle here!’
No wonder they were named ‘sisters of mercy’ in the Tsarist army.

One time groups of patients were driven in turn to the bathhouse in another building. 
It was necessary to stand under the lukewarm shower in a slippery cast-iron bath with brown greens on its walls.
You soaped the washcloth left by the previous shower taker and next to the bath there stood another naked already but not wet as yet, twitching his cheek and jerking the neck and staring in nowhere under the low ceiling.
The small waffle towel got soaked before you managed to wipe yourself off and the residual moisture was absorbed with the underwear.

In the afternoon it was better not to come near the windows in the hall.
A pair of tower cranes were seen through the glass, turning slowly their beams at distant construction sites, and from the bus station, there could be heard unintelligible announcing of bus departures of indiscriminate destinations and wishes of a happy journey. 
The sun was shining, the snow melting. 
Life was going on and on over there but you were on this side of the vertical bars.

Saturday in the fifth unit was the day of visitors reception, they were not allowed on other days of the week.
When the doorbell rang in the corridor, the on-duty nurse looked who was there and shouted out along the corridor the name of a patient to go outside the door and see his visitors.

My parents came on the first Saturday.
I was very surprised because I had not told anyone anything when leaving to Romny.
It turned out that the next day my landlady informed them of my absence, they called the SMP-615 and were told where I got off the bus the day before.
At the bus station, someone also remembered seeing me and the tangle got unraveled. 

We met on the landing in front the door to the fifth unit, one of the long benches was vacant.
Along that, we sat in a row. 
My mother, pushing her warm kerchief back from the head onto her shoulders, said:
‘How is it, sonny?’ and she began to cry,
My father, in order to calm and console her, said:
“Well, started! Started again!’

He did not take off his fur hat and did not cry but looked at the bench opposite, where another pair of parents fed all the goodies from their plastic bag to their patient – a crazy guy who did not talk at all because he had been bitten by an encephalitic tick. 

I also was eating.
My mother had brought all sorts of homemade cakes and buns, and Eclair cakes with custard filling from the cooking shop by the Under-Overpass.
She knew what I loved.

There was also lard in the plastic bag to take it with me, but I flatly refused.
So at the end of the meeting, my mother handed the bag to the nurse to store it in the dispenser room. 
But I did not go to the dining room when they called to come and eat the deliveries.
For the principle’s sake.

On the following Saturday, my brother and sister came instead of our parents. 
My brother had no hat on his head but he frowned just like our father and told me:
‘What for, Sehryoga? It’s no good you do it.’
And Natasha did not cry but kept reproving me:
‘Tell me just one thing – you really need it? Well done, good fellow!’

She said that Eera did not come although she called her so that she knew.
Eera never came to Romny either but I understood that she had to look after the baby.

On March 8 they brought a gurney to the corridor with a pile of free postcards for the holiday.
I filled one to Nezhin with congratulations and love for Eera.
While writing I was horrified how ugly and trembling were the lines in the postcard and the handwriting was not mine at all. 
Probably, because of injections.

The head doctor of the fifth unit did not start talks about music, she treated me.
I was injected with iminazine intramuscularly three times a day. 

The first days it still could be tolerated but then there was no intact spot left on the buttocks.
One shot got upon another, nodules sprang up over my ass that turned into a terrain of tightly swollen knolls and it became difficult to just walk along the corridor, leaving aside any orbiting.
The skin there too had no time for regeneration and started not very profuse but constant bleeding that stained the hospital underpants. 

The most unbearable was the final, third injection of a day.
It was shot at nine in the evening and at the sound of the tinkling of the metal boxes with syringes on the gurney pulled along the corridor, my teeth clenched like in a spasm. 
The gurney gradually reached our wardroom and the on-duty nurse appeared in the doorway with a syringe in her hand.
Having done an injection she returned to the corridor after another syringe for the next patient.

Once a nurse missed me and I pretended to be asleep so as not to remind her and when I heard the gurney tinkling along to wardroom 8 I could not believe my own luck.
An hour later the nurse called me by name from the doorway, she held a syringe in her hand and smiled victoriously:
‘Thought it’s over, Ogoltsoff?’

In the manipulation room, before they go around, those syringes were charged according to the list, when one remained unused on the gurney, she realized that someone had been missed.
You remembered – well done, but why smile?
At that moment she reminded me of Sveta from my polygamous past.
Probably, by her hairstyle...

I was also injected with insulin intravenously, but at first, the head doctor warned my parents to agree. 
Beltyukov, a young but experienced neighbor in the wardroom, told that they extract insulin from bull’s liver, there was nowhere else to get it from.
The purpose of these injections was to bring a patient into a coma. 
Many were cured that way, subtracting the percentage on whom the drug worked incorrectly.
But the percentage of survivors was higher.
The main trick was to pull the patient out of a coma in time. 

Shots of insulin were done to me and Beltyukov in the morning.
One insertion in a vein inside the arm elbow.
Then the nurse called the nearest paramedic and he came with volunteers from the patients to fix us with rags to the iron beds we were lying on.
They fixed only our arms but firmly so that we could not wring them away when led out of the coma back.
After about twenty minutes the nurse would return to the wardroom to fill out some ledger sitting at the white desk in the corner.
That’s why it was placed in that improper place – she was watching us like milk on fire so that it would not boil over.

Beltyukov and I lay on our beds, side by side, and talked looking into the ceiling. 
He was a sociable guy and looked like Vitalik from the construction battalion, or maybe not very much so.

Then our conversation turned into incoherent exclamations: Beltyukov talked about the dominance of fucking matriarchy and I declared that all people were brothers and how could you possibly not see it?

At the same time, my head was tilting back to see my backbone but the pillow was in the way. 
It was the signal for the nurse to put aside her ledger and give us a shot of glucose intravenously to ward off the upcoming coma. 
Then they untied us and gave a glass of water with a thick solution of sugar because the mouth burned very hot.

That does not mean that Beltyukov and I always shouted the same thing, it was just the core theme of our uncontrolled slogan chanting when under insulin.
On Sundays, we were not injected with that shit. 

The hardest to survive from was a shot of sulfur.
In fact, it is injected to drunks in the form of punishment but, perhaps, the head doctor had special experimental considerations, or maybe hopes.
She wanted to do her best.

It’s also a shot in the buttock, but the effects are spreading deep and down in the bone tissue.
Two days following the injection the treated has to drag his leg because of pain as if your join was finely smashed.

The shot of sulfur broke my will.
Dragging my leg, I came to the dining room to eat the lard from the delivery, but when the chmo dispenser patient handed me the bag, the smell inside was like that in my school briefcase in the fourth grade, when I forgot to eat the ham sandwich and it spent there all winter vacations.
I had to throw the lard away.

My relations with the fellow patients were even and correct – I still remained a renegade.
Those wrenched completely beyond any reach did not, naturally, notice me and who understood, as far as possible, showed certain respect because of sympathy and pity because of that they were injecting me with insulin.

Only one young guy, Podrez, for some time was fawning over me without any reason and one day in the queue to the dining room he hit me in the stomach, I couldn’t guess why.

Two minutes later, Beltyukov, in the same queue, found some fault with Podrez, pinioned him and kept immobilized.
He did not say me anything, not even with his look, but there was no need for hinting that he had fixed Podrez for me to jab the guy into an area of my choice.
But I did not hit, I felt sorry for the mentally ill, though my stomach hurt.

Much more crushing blow for me was the loss of the book in English.
On the white desk in our wardroom there remained only the copybook with the already finished translation.
I was very upset because the book was borrowed from Zhomnir, who borrowed it from another teacher at Department of English – the smiling Nona. 
But when I, in that terrified state, turned to the head doctor, she, with indefinite indifference responded that the book would not go anywhere.
And she was right.

Three days later it was returned to me by a patient who collected it from a half-nuts kidnapper from wardroom 7. 
He could not conceal it any longer.

(...I understand the thief’s sentiment.
At those times they did not know in the Soviet Union how to produce such glossy paperbacks for books and, all of a sudden—wow!—a bright close-up of a woman face against the background of the fifth unit.
Who would resist?..)

He did not crush it in any way, only on the backside of the cover he poured out his adoration with light touches of a pencil. 
Slightly reminiscent of a sketch of the cerebral cortex.
Or gentle curls of smoke.
Or maybe that was the formulas of some scientific language from a beyond the future…
Only I had already given up going down that road.

The patients were all very different.
By someone you could see at once there was a shift of conscience, but looking at another you would not say he's nuts.
In general, there were all kinds of sorts.

There were sociable ones, like the brunette fat man.
Yet one day, lying on the couch in the hall he confessed to me his murder of someone else.
And, usually so very cheerful, he grew at once all gloomy.
Maybe he lied because the murderers were kept at the second unit whose paramedics were some complete brute beasts.

There were arrogant liers.
One of them, with a fat tattoo of ‘Kolya' on his hand, started to convince me that his name was Peter, and then he evidently got offended although I had expressed no doubts. 

Tsyba amazed me with his erudition, he started to enumerate the unsuccessful suicide attempts of Hemingway until he realized that the pistol was most reliable.
And before that, I counted him among halfwits. 

One, seemingly normal, was very hurt when he heard that we all lived in a madhouse.
Always.
For life.
The madhouse was inside where we were, and outside too.
‘Do not say that at least here it's a mental hospital.' 
Such a delicate soul.

Or, say, that mujik whom I for a long period considered dumb.
On the contrary, he was very inquisitive it’s just that he prepared his questions all too carefully.
It took him a month before he approached me and, eye to eye, asked about the most painful:
‘And your wife was chaste?’
First, such words were not from the lexicon of dumbs, and secondly, I hadn’t checked her ears, quoting
Rabentus.
And the dumb, on hearing that, began to cry.
He fell silent again and the tears were dripping.

A rather gloomy madhouse on the whole.

However crazy, the patients knew everything and four days beforehand they warned me that on Friday I would be called to the commission where they decide to set me free or go on with treating.

The commission consisted of the head physician of the psychiatric hospital, the head doctor of the fifth unit and the on-duty nurse.
I was very afraid of saying something wrong and hastily agreed to anyone of them in anything they said:
‘Yes, yes, of course, yes!’
The head doctor said that I would be prepared for discharge but released only when some of my relatives would come to take me away.

How afraid I was that no one would come on Saturday!
After all, there had been such a Saturday when I waited in vain.
The whole evening I restrained myself not to burst into tears.
Sobs literally clenched my throat – I would not stand another week of injections...

My parents came together and we were summoned to the office of the head doctor.
She said that my treatment should be continued with iminazine pills.

My mother thanked her very much and my father took out money from his jacket pocket and handed it to my mother.
She came up to the head doctor and put the money into the pocket of her white medical coat, but she did not even notice it.

(...as it turned out later, the amount was forty rubles – the combined daily earnings of a team of six bricklayers.
That day there were three discharges, so the head doctor earned my monthly payment in one morning.
As they say in Konotop, it depends on what you've been educated for…)

On the bus from Romny to Konotop, my mother cautiously informed me that my things were moved from the apartment under the great birch back to 13 Decemberists. 
I was saddened by that news but I had not strength to resist…

At first, our team met me with caution, as a person who returned from Romny.
However, at the construction site, such attitude is quickly straightened out. 
If by the end of a working day you haven’t surprised anybody with your shovel over their head neither taken a dive from the fifth floor then you’re like everyone else.

True, Lyda noticed that I leaned against the pallet with bricks and dozed off in the sun before the crane brought up the mortar, which had never happened with me.
And Gregory commented to Grinya that I was not the same and pointed at the spanner I laid over the niche for the electric meters on the landing – one edge five centimeters higher than the other.
Grinya answered that they would eat it up all the same because the niche would not be visible behind the frame of the box for the meters.
I had to put the spanner to rights during the midday break, but earlier I wouldn’t have allowed myself such sloppily poor job.

Well, in general, I had become more compliant. 
The only thing that the treatment couldn’t straighten out was my refusal to fall on four bones when laying from the bridging slabs the wall on which they rest.
All did it on all four, it’s more convenient that way and safer too.
I still was squatting when laying the brick course on the lower level. 
Vita also at times refrained from kneeling.

(...it’s sometimes hard to get rid of a young pioneer inside you.
‘Better to dive from the fourth-floor height than lay the wall standing on your knees!'…) 

When I went to Nezhin for a weekend, I took pains to keep my eyes a little squinted, otherwise, people felt creepy at my sight – my lower eyelids drooped as if I'd been forced to watch a documentary series about the death camps, gas chambers, and grim crematoria. 
In the stoker-house of the construction battalion, I read a long article about Clockwork Orange in ‘Moscow' magazine where they applied the same technique to him. 

Then I noticed that a second chin began to form below my jaw and threw the glass container with iminazine pills (given by the fifth unit head doctor) into the drain pit in the garden of 13 Decemberists. 
My mother noticed it and threatened that she would report to psychiatrist Tarasenko about my violation of instructions from Romny.
‘Mom, how can’t you see? The pills are to make me crazy.’
I was always proud of my leanness and did not want to lose it notwithstanding its slight stoop.

Everything became as before.
Or nearly so.
The construction site. Nezhin.
The eyelids returned to their place and no need to strain the eye muscles.
The translations. 
The poems...

The poems started to emerge with the beginning of my construction worker career in the SMP-615.
They were not poems at first, but pieces of unconnected phrases.
Some seemed attractive by alteration of sounds in them, others by inherent ambiguity or rather their being double-barreled so that they could be interpreted in different ways.

In course of the labor process, I, secretly from fellow bricklayers, turned and revolved the pieces, recollected them, threw them out of my head to dogs, or devils, or scrap fucks, but the most persistent returned again.
Then there remained the last remedy – to stick them with a pen down to paper and forget.

(...in six years there gathered about 30 pieces of those uninvited stubborn rascals in two languages because each one was coming the way it fancied.
Among them were purely graphic ones painted from the surrounding landscapes like ‘the apple of the sky skewered on the sword of a beam...’;
or those marked by their onomatopoeic stickiness ‘Carkalomna barcarole'; 
or philosophical pieces like that about devoured God; 
and simply rhythmic-marching chants ‘what do we laugh at?.'...)

One of the first pieces I showed to Eera and she cocked up at once – who was that Madonna in padded workman jacket? 
As if I could know, just one of those queuing in the working canteen at the midday break.

As for ‘To the Tune of V.Kosma’ she did not ask anything, it was about her undoubtedly and clear.
Later she said that they told her it was a good poem and I stopped showing her anything.
Probably, out of jealousy caused by the unidentified someone to whom she gave it for evaluation.

When I read to my brother Sasha ‘The Scythian Interview’, his reaction was instantaneous:
‘You’re to be ratted on!’

(...if your poetry piece turns folk’s train of thoughts in KGB direction, it contains a worthy idea…)

Ivan, a carpenter from the SMP-615, somehow liked the line about a cabbage leaf on the edge of a knife.
After six months he asked to recite to him on cabbage once again. 
I do not know what could he find about it at all.

At times, when at the end of a midday break there were still five minutes before leaving the trailer to go on with laying the walls, the women of our team asked to read something new and Grinya shouted after the piece:
‘Sehryoga! They do not shoe horses with fire, there are horseshoes for that! Gelding ungroomed, that’s what you are!’
He was brought up and educated in the village of Krasnoye on the Baturin highway and should know such things better.

When the poems number exceeded a score my attitude to them changed qualitatively.
Why should they lay around?
Ain’t it a pity?
And I started to send them to the editorial offices of diverse magazines and book publishers.
Like Martin Eden from the nicknamed novel by Jack London.
And they were returning back to me, exactly as his to him, only with typewritten responses.

The responses looked like one and the same carbon copied answer.
That what I had sent was inconsistent with the thematic direction of their publication the editorial portfolio of which was filled for three years ahead, and not a single word about the verses themselves.
So Grinya’s review remained unsurpassed:
‘Gelding ungroomed!’

However, the literary collaborator at one of the journals shared, that a similar style was in the vogue in the 1930s. 
Probably, his aim was to point out the deprecated nature of the stuff, but made me happy instead – my poems had style! 

(...and what a style it was!
In the 30s' the Union of Writers had not been gelded yet with political purges and spy-hunting repressions. 
In those days people still wrote poetry and not conjuncture prone materials for the upcoming Party Congresses…) 

I gradually began to realize that guys whose trough was literary collaboration had no more interest in all those poetic ‘swords in the sky’ than in real-life skewers in their personal ass.

The final eye-opener became the response from ‘Moscow’ magazine to ‘Tired Alla’.
It was immediately evident that the literary collaborator showed a serious and thoughtful approach when considering the poem received.
One of the words in it turned out to be unknown to him and he took pains to check in with a dictionary.
He forgot to erase his pencil notes in my verse.
The word ‘craving’ remained underlined and its interpretation—‘lust’—was added nearby.
I do not know in which dictionary he found it, but it offended me.
The finishing blow was the name of the reviewer under his response – Pushkin!
A picture of Pushkin looking up ‘craving’ in a dictionary made me draw the line under fucking the editors’ brains with my stupid simplicity.
I realized that I was not a Martin Eden and it was anything but America around...

The discovery of my non-America whereabouts cut postal expenses for envelopes and registered letters.
Though sending such a letter was about fifty kopecks, the equivalent of two ‘Belomor-Canal' cigarette packs. 
The cost of living in the Soviet Union was quite reasonable and treatment of illusions, in fact, free of charge. 

In the summer you again visited Konotop, but, naturally, without any carriage.

Our team was working on the 50-apartment block near the Under-Overpass and one of the riggers, Katerina, shouted from the ground that I had visitors. 
I went downstairs and outside the gate to the sidewalk.

You stood next to Eera.
She was wearing a red sarafan with white Mongolian patterns.
I don’t remember what you had on, but I remember how cool you were smiling.

I gently lowered my plastic helmet onto your blond straight hair and it slipped right to your nose but could not put out your happy smile.
I remember that smile from under my helmet.

In a minute you both went on down the sidewalk and I watched after you, and the riggers, Katerina and Vera Sharapova, they also watched from behind the gate, suddenly silent and thoughtful because such beauty was going away – a woman in red hand in hand with a child with blond straight hair.
