
You had just turned three years old and I decided that the best gift for you would be a familiar face among the strangers at 13 Decemberists.
I went to Nezhin and, despite my tongue-tiedness, managed to convince Tonya to let her son go with me to your birthday in Konotop, provided that my father-in-law would arrive the following day and take him back.
Tonya was a really brave woman, she was not afraid of my reputation, finally drenched after Romny.

The local train was overcrowded and we had to stand in the aisle up to Bakhmach.
But how happy were you and Igor when we came to 13 Decemberists.
So much squealing!. 

And the next week I was on my vacation and four of us—you, Eera, I and Lenochka—went to the Seim.
My parents took a permit for us to the recreation camp of the RepBase.

It was a wide grounds bordered by a low plank fence where between large pines stood wooden huts with four beds in each and windows on all sides, like a veranda. 

When we first went to the river beach everybody got just stupefied, they never saw a Greek goddess go, moreover with such snow-white skin as Eera’s.

Another day we the four of us went hunting mushrooms in the forest plantation near Taransky Khutor village. 
Halfway there we met a pair of horses, but I worried for only Eera, she always was afraid of those animals.

The forest planting was of young pines standing in parallel rows.
Long spider webs stretching between the lined trees made the plantation almost impassable, but there were suillus in the fallen pine needles.
We were combing through the corridors formed with the pine trunks: there and back.

You grew thirsty and I asked Lenochka to take you to the camp—the path was wide and about just three hundred meters—because I wanted Eera all too madly.
You did not agree for a long time, but finally went on, and a minute later at the end of the pine corridor your crying rang out and Lenochka explained that you did not listen to her at all, although there were no horses anymore. 

In the evening there was heavy rain with a thunderstorm, but you were not afraid and only laughed because I was laying on my bed and you were stomping on my stomach. 
Someone's joy might hurt another one – in your three years you were a weighty kid, but Eera cried out to be patient with my own child.
I tolerated a little more and then I could hardly persuade you that it’s enough already.
It was a good summer...

On the day of your departure, you were again sorting it out with the linen rope stretched from the gate to the porch which really was not a right place for it.
You took a mop and started to knock it on the half-dried laundry along the rope.

My mother yelled at you and darkened with her face, but you already were too big to lose your footing and only the mop was taken from you.

We had to go to the tram terminal on foot, but Lenochka volunteered to take you there on the trunk of her bicycle.
Eera agreed though I was against the idea.
My misgivings increased when I noticed the glances exchanged between my mother and Lenochka.
The most frightening was that they did not look at each other, but into the ground at each other’s feet.
And there was a silent dialogue between their averted eyes:
‘Sure?’
‘Yes, do it!’

I do not invent, neither distort reality with fantasies and that could be proved with what happened next.
Yes, the dialogue which I could not hear but was aware of by means of I don’t know what really took place before the following events.

You left sitting on the trunk behind Lenochka.
My mother and Eera for a whole minute were ping-ponging empty phrases.
Eera and I went out into the street.
With the bags in my hands, I hurried along leaving Eera behind.
Before reaching the corner, some two hundred meters ahead, I knew that I was right in being rash when I heard your scream.

You stood by the fence and screamed.
Lenochka, holding her bicycle, tried to persuade you not to cry, but you did not listen to her and screamed on and on. 
The rusty iron pipe stuck up from under the ground between you two.
The only iron pipe by all the fences along the half-kilometer stretch between 13 Decemberists and the tram 3 terminal.

Everything fell into place. 
I got it all.
Very gently, so as not to show that I was aware, I asked Lenochka to go home; no need to see us off any further.

Then Eera came up too and started to comfort you, but you cried all the way to the terminal because of such a big bump on your forehead.

We silently drove in the tram.
Eera, dissatisfied with something was looking blankly out the window. 
You sat sullenly in her lap, and I, in the opposite seat, was fully devastated. 

How to live in a world where a grandmother blesses her granddaughter to kill another granddaughter of hers – this beautiful kid with 5 kopecks coin pressed by her mother to her forehead for the bump to dissolve?

Eera was silent on the train too and I did not even try to share what shouldn't be shared... 

(...now Lenochka has two children, beautiful daughters.
 You and she are strangers to each other and no one of you remembers anything.
Especially that pipe.
People are blessed with the gift of forgetting bad things.

My mother eventually became a witness of Jehovah and had collected piles of glossy eye-candy booklets for the saved or those who want to be saved. 

And it’s my fault that all that happened, but, upon my word of honor, in that recreation camp I wouldn’t stand Lenochka on my stomach – she was already nine years old…)

When I returned to work, the pavement before the 50-apartment block was cut with a transverse trench for the tie-in to the main communications under the Peace Avenue road. 
However, carpenters of the SMP-615 assembled a boarding bridge over the trench with beam railings for the convenience of the pedestrians. 

I was at the trench bottom working with the shovel when I saw Beltyukov on that bridge.
He was dressed in a polished colonial style.
I did not want to attract his attention, but he recognized me from up there, despite my spetzovka and helmet, stopped on the bridge to greet me and introduced to his mother, a lady in an aggressive neckline.

Then they went on.
He was nervous and she guarded him closely, and I understood the roots of his bitterness at matriarchy when he was being under insulin.

I also thought that our meeting in Romny was not his final stay in a mental hospital because he was strolling up there, defenseless.
Learn from me, sonny, down here in the trench, in my helmet, no bastards would reach me.
As for my stay in the madhouse, I went there as a volunteer and got fed up to the utmost, made wiser through my busted ass...

Accepting another of my translations, Zhomnir, in return,  warmed me up with a thick hardback book.
A monograph about schizophrenia.
He bought it when his daughter had problems with it; before she got married.

Monograph means a collection of articles by different authors whose works are dedicated to one common theme.
I thoroughly studied the friendly shared volume.
After all, that was not boiled sausage with added charms to win my love.

(...the authors consider different aspects the title subject from diverse standpoints according to their respective specializations.

One writer presents the comparison of the biochemical blood composition in some notorious schizophrenics at the peak of their spiritual activity to the periods of relative calm in the same person.
Unfortunately, the level of amino acids in leukocytes snows no sign of exacerbation.

Another contributor scrupulously measures anything which turns up to their measuring devices with the equally disappointing indefinite result. 

The third one just takes a seat next to the bed with a fixed up patient and, while the aberrating fictionalist drives him a fool, he writes down some really fabulous stuff.
Like, as he was going by trolleybus 47 being careful not to touch anyone and all the same there suddenly was a desert all around him and just a worn-out rag on his loins, and he was in a pack of similarly skinny, naked, sunburned guys like him when a band of horsemen galloped from behind a sandy hillock and started to massacre the unarmed fugitives sticking them with spears... 

Yet, on the whole, it is a useful monograph because of the authors, despite the fact they all were from the rotten West, had the courage of real scientists to honestly put their hands up and acknowledge: 
‘Alas! I fucking do not know what the fuck is this fucking schizophrenia about!’

‘Make sure to approach her tenderly,
Look deeply into her eyes,
You’ll find the treasure you have never seen!..’

On the present level of the research methodology, the science has only just the term ‘schizophrenia', everything else is wrapped in the dense mist of uncertainty. 

The main trump ace, touchstone and litmus test provided by the science are ‘the voices'. 
You meet them in any textbook on the psychiatry.
If you hear some voices and there is not a living soul around, then you are a schizophrenic.
But if them those voices say:
‘Save France!’
Then you're a Saint – Joan of Arc. 

The only weak point in the monograph was the absence of a theology expert.
Suffice it to recall St. Inez, whose body was in a split second covered with long fur canceling any possibility of the rapists to break her chastity.

They are enjoying cakes and ale in their picnic in the bed of roses, the specialists in the trade whose luminaries can’t see the misty core of what they are, actually, about.
To concoct a diagnosis is easier than making a fig. 
Pour half a glass raw schizophrenia, spice with a pinch of double-barreled adjectives, shake the ingredients…
Enjoy!
‘Fur-coat-like form of schizophrenia’, the favorite drink of St. Inez!

Tamara of the fourth kilometer was not in the know of all of my exploits.
For the burned down plantation of hemp, I could be easily stamped with ‘autodafic form of schizophrenia aggravated with Torquemada complex' in honor of that absolutely normal inquisitor who sent packs of heretics to the stake. 

For the term itself were used (as for the most part of terms in the scientific nomenclature) the words from old Greek which, when putting ancient roots together, mean ‘cracked mind’.
‘The mind cracked in the form of a fur coat.’
So, who of us is schizophrenic after all?!

They think that if they don the white medical coats and trumpet a trump from the terminology they themselves don’t know a damn thing in, I will believe them more than the Ichnya sorcerer in his khaki shirt and mumbling of the moon ‘quarters’?
Oh, my dear aesculapius-kindergarten kids! 
Mind you, I am from Konotop.
My classmate Volodya Sherudillo could casually give out:
‘I cannot ignore the data of quasi-pseudo illusions in order to avoid the ultimate diffusion of my transcommunicational skills.’

After the eighth grade he went to the ‘seminary', aka GPTU-4, otherwise, by now he would be Head of the Academy of Sciences and you would be sitting in the waiting room of his office in trembling expectation if he would, or wouldn't listen to you, the petty CEC khannoriks. 

In short, while no one knows where schizophrenia comes from and where goes to, and how much is her fee for a visit, you could just as well go and f-f.. fumble yourself against something else.
That is to say, go, sweet ones, go...) 

On the weekends in Nezhin the three of us had a walk to the kindergarten in the narrow streets of the neighborhood.
It did not work on Saturdays and the entire playgrounds—all those stalls and slides—were for you.
The swing hung on iron bars gave out the brief and shrill heartbreaking screams.
Eera stood in the distance.
And then you began running over the yellow leaves upon the ground from me to her and back, but even that did not bring us closer.

We were going back along the same empty streets without sidewalks.
I held your hand and did not take my eyes off the smooth play of round hips under the light dress of Eera walking ahead of me...

Tonya got an apartment for her family somewhere on the Shevchenko street.
Gaina Mikhailovna was planning to rent the freed bedroom to one of the military pilots from the Airfield-Area, who were howling in the sky with their training flights each Tuesday and Friday.
I was not present in any plans an even could not be because of Lenochka who I refused to leave in Konotop without a dad either.

Our quarrels with Eera became less desperate but more frequent.
I felt the steady progress towards the end when I would become a completely cut off chunk.

(...probably, Dostoevsky had the like feeling when they were driving him to the scaffold in a cart and, by the familiar streets, he was calculating how much more remained before the execution. 
The difference was only that I did not know how many words remained to hear from Eera before she’d say:
‘Get away to that Konotop of yours! And never show up in Nezhin!’
Yet, I knew that I would hear them…)

When Eera said so, then, along with the pain, there, strangely, came a little relief – nothing remained to be afraid of. 
It was finished.

I went to Konotop and began to live a half-life.
I worked with our team, read, wrote, talked, but half of me disappeared somewhere together with the aim for which I was doing all that before I had got cut off. 

The dullness of half-life was a bit alleviated by a business trip to Kiev.
I was alone there from the SMP-615, and I did not know where the rest of the workers came from to the reconstruction a dairy factory. 

We lived in a passenger car driven into a dead end in the factory grounds.
They gave us bed linen yellow with age and fairly fretted but gently soft because of that.
I occupied the upper bunk in a compartment to skip folding up the mattress in the morning.
And everywhere sounded one and the same song:

‘The leaves of yellow are twirling ‘round the city...’

And I remembered the leaves on the playgrounds in the deserted kindergarten.

On weekends I went to the library of Kiev University, in the building to the left from the monument to Taras Shevchenko.
People were allowed there without a diploma, leaving their passports in the entrance lobby.

In a huge but quiet reading room with long tables, there was a separate lamp with a shade for each reader. 
There I read in the original John Mill’s treatise ‘On Freedom’.

That’s what a real philosophy is!
He showed me that there are just two kinds of people:
1) law-abiding loyal subjects;
2) experimentalists.
And all race, class, confession differences are only a means of setting people against each other...

Then I found the House of Organ Music.
Looks like it was a Catholic church before, in the Red Army street under the Republican Stadium.

I was a little late for the concert with the door locked already, so I had to knock from outside.
They opened it and I cried as in the bus to Romny:
‘I have a ticket! I have a ticket!’
‘Very well. But could you be quieter? The concert is on.’
The hall there was right behind the entrance without any vestibule.
‘Excuse me.’
But he continued to murmur something else in discontent.
‘Wanna me apologize once more?’

And he shut up because under the intelligentsia style cloak that I doffed there was a blue corduroy jacket of workmen and peasants and when I took off my secret agent hat a strand of hair sprang like a spring stuck up from my head.
It was impossible to smooth it, even after the shower the stubborn strand, on getting dry, cocked up again.

(...about thirty years later, such explosion of hair became an everyday fashion. 
That’s how deeply I was shocked by separation from Eera…)

In the first part, they played some modern atonal symphony – a tormenting screech of shredded noted and shards of tunes. 
But in the second the organ sounded the fugues of Bach...

The miracle happened in January.
I arrived in Nezhin to visit Zhomnir and on a bus starting from the station I saw Ivan Alexeyevich.
He asked me how came I had not been seen for so long.
Restraining a sob in my throat, I replied that Eera had forbidden me to show up.
‘Forget it! Come on, let’s go!’
I still got off the bus on the Shevchenko street and later phoned from Zhomnir.
Eera also said, yes, come.
The remaining seven bus stops to Red Partisans I drove outwardly calm but with storm-churned waves inside. 

Many changes occurred in the months of my absence.
Eera moved together with you to the former Tonya’s family bedroom.
Her parents went over into the narrow bedroom.
The living room was left as it was: ‘The Unknown Beauty’ with the same contempt looked from the sideboard, and the rich merchant’s daughter crookedly trotted from the major pinching his mustache.

But in your bedroom there stood a new dressing table with a crowd of incomprehensible but so necessary cosmetic jars.
A wide yellow ring of gold lay close to the mirror.
To my cautious inquiries, Eera said that the pier was bought by her father and her mother presented her the ring. 
And we began to live on...

The construction site.
Nezhin.
The construction site.
Nezhin.

Eera worked as a caretaker in the kindergarten two hundred meters down the Red Partisans street.
Her duties included keeping records of the health state of children in her group.
By the mirror of the dressing table there lay a copybook with notes in her handwriting, with a slant to the left, how kids were each day of the week. 

I only once opened that copybook and after that, I tried not even to look at it so as not to die of jealousy. 
It became clear to me that there was no use anymore to tread the path of righteousness and no need to try escaping the inevitable because it had already happened. 

(...certain thoughts are better to be left alone and not thought at all but if you have still happened to start, they're better to be dropped and not thought all the way down their consequential road to the very end...) 

I felt ashamed of asking Eera how she lived these months and what she was doing in between my weekend visits, but when I saw in that copybook that on Thursday half Eera’s group came with a cold I knew that on Wednesday she was on a date.
I was dying of jealousy but kept silent.

Life became like a run through a maze – not to take that turn, not to look that side, not to think that thought…

Then Eera introduced the order to put you to sleep next to her on the double bed and I was moved out to the bed-chair.
Sometimes she came to me in the dark, sometimes not, and then I did not sleep for long over the midnight tormented by bitterness and jealousy.

Only one time I was happy about not having a sex with her.
An overcrowded bus with frost coated windows was driving me from the station to Red Partisans.
Somewhere halfway up I suddenly felt penetration into my anus.
They had never made me enema nor probe insertion in my life, so the feeling was unfamiliar and inexplicable amid a crowd of passengers in coats and sheepskins.
After the main square, the crowd thinned but I couldn't get rid of a feeling that I got raped in the rectum. 

It is for that reason that I did not insist on having a sex that night because I was afraid that Eera would later have it with the fucker who fucked me on the bus.
And what if...
The sequence of events could be the reverse, after all, but I swayed away that iffiness... 

At the end of February, there was a working Saturday, aka ‘black Saturday'. 
Each year had six Saturdays of that color and not only in the SMP-615.
However, I said a firm ‘no!’ and on Friday after work went to Nezhin.

I had a solitary dinner in the kitchen because Eera told you not to disturb your daddy when he’s eating and took you to the living room.
Then I went over to the bedroom so as not to disturb everyone in the living room watching TV.
Besides, there was no place to sit down because your aunt Vita had come from Chernigov to stay with her parents for the vacation.

You also came to the bedroom and we were a little noisy and Eera came to make out the beds for you and me.
She turned off the light so that you would fall asleep sooner and returned to the living room because on TV there was a replay of the New Year ‘Kinopanorama'. 
I stayed in the dark in front of the new dressing table.

I did not make any plans and everything went somehow by itself.
When the sound of your breathing showed that you were well asleep, I waited another five minutes and then took you over to the chair-bed.
Then I undressed and lay down on the matrimonial double.
I lay for a long time with my hands under my head.

The traffic along the Red Partisans street almost died our but the noise of the rare cars became even more unbearable and the glare of their headlight was creeping along the window curtains.
Poor Tonya. How could they live here?

Then I began to think about us with Eera: how could we come to live like this?
Here was I, for example, filled with just jealousy and the desire of having a sex with her.
All other feelings, besides these two, were successfully suppressed so that they would not bring more pain anymore.
Only these two were stronger than me.

And what about her?
At the institute, she was lucky to pull such a reputable trump from the pack. 
All the girlfriends withered with envy.

Girlfriends went away to their appointment places and the trump's reputation got wet. 
And then the mother with the gold ring.
You’re so young, a good man still will come round the corner, better if he were a military pilot, their salaries far above the misery 120 rubles.

And what in the end?
We just have what we have.
That Soviet Pushkin, the sycophant of a literary collaborator had called it lust.
Stupid nerd.
The lust comes when there is no more craving.

And again howling of a car.
This one comes from afar, from the Airfield-Area.
The light crawls up over the curtains, puts its back in an arc, and we found the way to avoid the stress caused by sharp interruption of the natural flow of the act in the final phase to control the birth rate, just like Arthur Clark’s astronauts jumping from one spaceship’s lock to another without any spacesuits through the open space, with a side bonus of using the seed for lotions with more beneficial effectiveness for the skin than that of mummia, ginseng, and even ojb grass because the inquisitive digressions of those loving to love their beloved lovingly will beat any Kama Sutra, I always knew that although have never read but is it worth while?..
Here’s another… they are just wrenching your soul out when passing by…
Poor Tonya, how could they live here?

Then from the door to the living room there came the farewell voices wishing good night.
Eera came into the bedroom.
In the light of the street lamp from the other side of the tulle curtain, she found the needed vial from the ranked by the dressing table mirror and went out again.
I got filled with tension.
She did not return for a long time and when she returned and closed the door she bent over you to listen if I was asleep.
You slept as an innocent baby and did not wake up. 

Eera lay by under the blanket, touched me, abruptly recoiled and cried out: 
‘You?! Get out of here!’
‘Come on, quiet...’
‘Dad!’

She called for help to get protected from me! 

I did not touch her, only lay idly resting my jaw in my hand, like a beach-goer estimating how many people were there in the water.
I turned into an outsider, an idle on-looker because everything somehow became all the same to me.
Calm, detached, I said: 
‘I’m fed up with you.’

Said I that? No! Not true! Not fed up! It's not me! 
And yet it was I who pronounced the words, the part of the ritual.
What ritual?!
It made no difference what.
I did not care anymore.

With my head still leaning against my hand, I held out the other and slapped it on the soft cheek.
I?!
Hit her?!
Of course, not.
It was not a blow, it was part of the ritual. 
She became speechless from astonishment but it was too late.

I dropped back against the pillow and pulled the blanket up to my chin.
The switch clicked, in the bright light from the ceiling, her parents and the sister crowded in the doorway.
She jumped out of the bed and joined the group.
Vita started to emit the traditional screams of a family squabble.

Ivan Alexeyevich in his pajamas stood with his head down.
I saw how difficult it was for him to make the decision.
What if I was naked? Before his princedom harem?
But there was nothing I could do to help him.
My role was that of an on-looker.

Finally, he made a decisive step, even two, grabbed my hand sticking from under the blanket and pulled me onto the rug on the floor.
The blanket remained on the bed.

I lay a little down there while my mother-in-law was reading Prayers at the Departure of the Soul, to the tune how hugely shameless I was to lay prostrate before ladies in such an undressed state.
Underpants and a tank-top may be a decent sportswear in the stadium, but not in the presence of a mother-in-law.

I silently got up and, quite unexpectedly even for myself, made a deep bow to shake off the non-existent dust from the hair below my knees. 
A ritual makes us follow its canon even if we have no idea of it.

‘We shall renounce the old world of tyrants,
We shall shake off its ashes from out feet!..’

I dressed and went out into the hallway.
The mother-in-law followed.
To make sure I would not open the refrigerator?

She was replaced by a quiet, attentive Eera.
I gave her one ruble and asked to pass it to Vita who lent me the sum a week earlier.
She nodded.
I took a piece of paper out of my briefcase and wrote a note to Vita with gratitude for the ruble.
Even the grave cannot fix a graphomaniac.
