
The night was quiet and windless.
I spent it standing at the nearest bus stop the way I was standing in front of a ticket office at the Odessa airport locked for the midday break.
Only now there were no roses in my hand.

‘The Sun was never any match for you,
Brother Rain,
That is true from any point of view,
Brother Rain.
Twining in the dates too rare,
Stuck in love and black despair,
Shedding diamond tears in vain,
Tears of ecstasy and pain
Go your way and get away, Brother Rain...’

It was a quiet indifferent midwinter night.
In all that night three cars passed the bus stop, one of them Volga.
I did not care.
Numbness of the senses.
In the one-story building opposite, the light went on and, soon after, off, twice; should be an elderly person going to the toilet and back.

In the gray dark twilight, the first bus appeared from the Airfield-Area and drove me to the station. 

At half past seven, I got off the local train in Konotop. 
I do not know where I spent the following hour because when I came to 50-apartment block the black Saturday was in full swing.
The bulldozer in the future yard roared and, wrapped in the blue mist of smoke from its exhaust pipe, was burying itself in the hill of earth it moved ahead.
Grinya and Lyda had already been changed into their spetzovkas and padded jackets.
‘You did not go to Nezhin?' Lyda asked. 
‘No.’

I took a sheet of paper from my briefcase with the report to the trade union committee how were spent 3 rubles when visiting a patient in the hospital.

(...my next public position was to visit the SMP-615 employees when they got to the hospital and comfort them with a delivery from the trade union committee which allocated 3 rubles for the purpose. 
I was visiting the colleagues solo, but the report on spending the amount of 3 rubles should have three signatures for it was a huge sum of money…)

I put the paper on the side of a concrete pipe 1.5 meters in diameter and 1.5 meters long and they signed it without reading. 
‘Now?’ asked Grinya, ‘Are you changing or what?’
I was always opposing black Saturdays but what else had I to do?
I changed into the work clothes and went with my shovel to clean the upshot truck-dump with the mortar stuck to it replacing Vera Sharapova.
She had already noticed long ago that it was the way I drove away my jealousy fits.

In the evening, at 13 Decemberists, I was lying prostrate in the armchair-bed in the dark living room. 
Laying all the time on your back is really tiring.
I wanted to move and turn over but I did not allow myself to stir because I needed to become inconspicuous, and movements betray you.

When motionless, I became part of the bottom of an infinite and immensely empty world.
To be part of it you should be smoothly streamlined and produce no rips so that nothing would cling to you and float past and further, along its way.
But what a vast emptiness it was!

(...there is a no worse curse than the old folk curse ‘be it empty to you!' 
The purpose of any loss is to make you feel empty, deprived of something.
To feel you are empty of something. 

Love comes as a defensive reaction to the endless empty repetition of the life's mill-wheel returning to where from where it had started as empty as it returned. 
Love comes to protect from despair, when you're empty of any idea how to dispose of the accidental and vain gift – your life – when you find no means to kill the eternity measured out to you. 
When you feel at loose ends, having nothing to live for but for aimless living on.
Love comes to fence off empty questions, to present your life with some meaning – to serve! – to give it the point – to serve!

Love is a self-denying slavery and zealous service for the object of love  – a two-legged mammal, or a collection of stamps, or … no matter… it depends on how lucky you are… 

And then, like a bolt from the blue, the shackles are torn, you are said: get out!
You are freed!

And you find yourself in the void where there is no purpose, no sense, where you have just to live – like a crystal, like grass, like a rain-worm. 
We are not slaves, slaves are not we!

No! I want back! To where love is…
It would save from the horror of facing the emptiness, it would give meaning to the senseless fuss.
Love will be the one to make decisions.
I will obediently obey the orders!

Love is the sand where to bury the frightened ostrich head…

Damn you, love!
How empty it feels without you!..)

Surviving in the void is not an easy problem.
Of course, there is always a choice.
Why survive if you can stop the torment any moment? 
However, never in my life had I even played with the thought of suicide.
Not programmed that way.

Well, and since there was no choice, I had to solve the problem.
The solution is only one – systematicy.
Nothing else can overcome emptiness.
Whether you’re systematically jamming vodka, or systematically jogging in the park does not matter much.
What's important, is a repetition of a certain cycle. 

I was happy to have some investments giving certain means of spanning the void.

The five-day work week, that’s for one.
My participation in the SMP-615 public life – two.
And also, visits to Nezhin for intellectual communication with Zhomnir with a periodicity of two or three months. 
Who would ask for more?

Any system, so that it works, needs some sort of a carrot as a reward for spinning the wheel, for successfully concluding its vicious circle and a stimulation for going into the next, exactly the same rotation.

On Thursdays, I visited the bathhouse with two turns into the steam room. 
Bars of soap and vehniks, aka bunches of dried birch twigs for self-whipping in the steam room, were sold in the bathhouse ticket office on the first floor.
I left those instruments of pleasure on the low tables with gray marble tops in the common washing hall on the second floor taking home only replaced underwear for subsequent laundry.

On my way from the bathhouse to the place of residence I consumed two bottles of Zhigulevskoye beer and bought an issue of 'Morning Star' from the news stall on the Peace Square for reading with a dictionary until next Thursday.

On Mondays, I did washing in a tin basin on the bench in the yard, in winter the washing was done in the summer room section of the shed. 
The ironing day depended on the weather conditions around the cloth-line, which was stretched from the porch to the shed and not to the gate anymore. 
Better late, than never.

Weekends were harder to fill, but once a month in ‘The Peace’ cinema they showed another of action movies starring Belmondo, or a comedy with Jean Richard.

Summer Sundays were no problem at all, I spent them on the Seim beach lying on the pink cover with red circles for wrapping babies.
The same one which on weekdays was used as the table cover to iron dry washing.
The blanket was left at 13 Decemberists after one of your visits there.
It was rather short and my legs, in part, remained stretched out over the sand, but who cares?

Three times a Sunday I had a swim for the buoys, where there were no screaming bathers, lay on my back on the water, with my arms outstretched sideways, and pronounced the home-made ritual formula:
‘Oh, water! Ran into each corner of mine! We are of one blood – thou and me.' 

(...to assemble such a phrase I had to involve Fitzgerald and Kipling in collaboration, but they did not mind my plagiarism…)

Then I swam back to the screams and splashes, got back to the coverlet and turned on it from side to side frying myself in the sun, between the periods of reading 'Morning Stars'.
On the beach I read it without a dictionary, underlining the words which had to be written out later in a copybook.

At the midday meal time, I left the beach and went to the store in Khutor Taransky. 
It was a casual hutta under a thatched roof but with a thick iron strap across its door and a massive padlock.
The store manager, the elderly burly woman, who was proud of her having seen even the Sakhalin Island, unlocked the door for only one hour.

When she dropped the iron strap on the porch, the door opened into a room with two dust-covered windows in the same wall with the door, and the plank counters running along the remaining three walls with doubled wide shelves above them. 

I systematically bought one sample of canned food, a pack of cookies and a bottle of lemonade.
After opening the feast items with the opener borrowed from the store manager, I took the meal out to the completely empty street of four huttas and deep sizzling hot sand in the road.
There I sat on the wide bench of a cracked but mighty board turned gray by the years of exposure to the whims of weather going its unchanging season circles around the tree over the bench and the thatched hutta of the store nearby.

The assortment of things on the store shelves never changed.
Buying a can of ‘Tourist’s Breakfast’, I saw that next Sunday I would have ‘Sprats in Tomato Sauce’ for the meal and a week later ‘Zucchini Squash’.
The can with the sticker ‘Adjika’ instilled obscure fears because I had heard it somewhere it was hotter than even wasabi, but it was still a month away.
Maybe, I’d combine it with the small jar of cherry jam from the following shelf?
It would be a complex dinner.

In the end, I wiped the aluminum spoon with the wrapper from the finished off cookies and hid it at the back of the hatta, in the thatched straw over the blind wall, the way kulak bandits had been hiding their barrel sawed shotguns. 
Even Marcello Mastroianni could not be dreaming of a sweeter ‘Dolche Vita’.

And right in that hutta, I had bought a doll for your birthday present. 
There were only two rubber dolls on the shelves – a girl and a monkey.
Each one had a tiny squeaker in its back to make a sound when pressed.
The pair of motorcyclists, who managed to overcome the deep sand of the road that day, advised me to but the monkey, but I took the girl as I had planned on previous Sundays, in a bright dress—also rubber—to her knees.

I could buy a present from the Department Store in the city, of course, but all the toys there were made of plastic.
Besides, I wanted it to be a gift from that enchanted hutta with its cool shade in the middle of the summer heat...

Although I am not sure if any system would save me without our team application to it.
This isn’t meant to say that the team members surrounded each other with caring attention, tenderness and moral support.
Like hell, they would! 

In our team, as anywhere else, they were all too glad to have a good laugh at your expense.
And everybody had a family and kids of their own as an outlet for their tender care.
Except for the red-hair Peter Kyrpa, aka Kyrpanos, but eventually, he also got lassoed and corralled and broken in as a family man by Raya, from the team of plasterers. 

And yet, from 8 am to 5 pm our team, with all their personal problems and concerns, became one family.
For all the hole-picking jokes in each other’s address, you wouldn’t be a victim of a detrimental practical joke with smoldering cotton or any other injury endangering one.

Do bricklayers use taboo words in ladies presents?
Both yes and no.

I had never heard a four-letter word addressed to any woman in our team.
Never.

But when the crane operator puts a pallet of bricks on your foot, you report it to the whole world—and very loudly too—without paying much attention if there were ladies around.

Are women of a bricklayer team using taboo words? 
Both no and yes.

At the moments threatening with trauma or loss of life, they shout ‘Oy! Mamma!' 
Or just scream.
Whereas in the intervals between shoveling mortar to the boxes for bricklayers, or rigging the brick pallets with the steel prickly cables, Katerina could easily share the folklore song:

‘Go fuck yourself, you dumbos, you’re stupider than they said,
Not allowing marry your daughter? So fuck her in my stead!..' 

I admit, that replaying this particular folklore piece in my brain convolutions sometimes served me as a good painkiller.

But, after all, is the foul language the only thing to frown at in the world?

The bricklayer Lyubov Andreyevna once complained to the head engineer, who accidentally dropped in at the construction site, about the insulting words of our foreman Mykola Khizhnyak by which he identified all women indiscriminately: 
‘Inside-out insoles!’

Up to now, I haven’t the slightest idea what it could mean, but she somehow got hurt.

Probably, because of she was the most beautiful woman on our team, only sad at times. 
It is sad for a woman to know she’s beautiful and, at the same time, not knowing what to do with her beauty and only watch how it flows away in vain.
She had a husband five years younger than her.
Before their marriage, he was walking around with a knife hidden in his high boot and she had made of him an exemplary family man and a safe member of society. 
But she still remained sad, especially in winter frosts, when the mortar in the boxes would develop a centimeter thick ice crust while climbing through the air to the line.
‘Oy, Mamma! How do my little hands get numb with cold!' 
And that parasite of Sehryoga would readily respond from the other end of the line:
‘Serves you good! Your mummy-daddy kept telling you “dear daughter, study well so you’ll become an accountant!”
And what was your answer?
“No! I love the shovel forever!”
So now shut up and love it until you get blue!’
‘Parasite!’

Anna Andreyevna was not as beautiful as Lyubov Andreyevna, but she was kind.
Especially after the break for the midday meal. 

Almost the whole team lived in the At-Seven-Winds and went home in the break for the midday meal.
Now, she would accompany her meal with a couple of shots and return to the workplace softened and kind-hearted. 
Her only drawback, that she was hunting my hammer.
The moment my vigilance got slacken, she’d snatch the hammer and bury it in the wall with mortar.
Most bricklayers cut bricks with their trowels but I, for righteousness sake, did it with the hammer.

Lyda’s and Vita’s husbands were the SMP-615 employees as well.
They were locksmiths in the production building in the base grounds under the supervision of the chief mechanic.
And they, naturally, were drinking. 
And the following morning in the bricklayers' trailer you for one whole hour had to listen to curses to those bastards who were not even around anywhere.

Although the curses from Lyda were listenable, she sang them out like a song with Vita’s backing in the background.

Vita herself was not really eloquent.
When we were finishing off the uppermost part of the walls on the 110-apartment block, for the final bridging with roof slabs, she was next to me in the line of the bricklayers and when I jumped over the wall then all she could say after me was: 
‘Sehrguey! Where to?’

The brick courses laid by me needed jointing so I jumped outside onto the concrete awning over a balcony on the fifth floor.
But she had no idea about that awning!
Now, a man is diving from the roof of a five-story building and all she’s prepared to say was:
‘Sehrguey! Where to?’

Here's, in a nutshell, the female logic, and knowledge of physics – down, of course, I had jumped! 
Where else?

Our team was young.
The oldest bricklayer in our team, forty-year-old Grigory Grigoryevich said it directly:
‘We’re still young.’

He had exceptional pedagogic skills and when noticed that his son, a ninth grader, somewhere on a tram, or a street, was gaping at a woman worthy of looking at, he'd never miss the chance of seizing the opportunity: 
‘Wanna get you some of that sort? Study well, bastard!' 
He had a round Napoleonic face because of the thin hair strand on his forehead.
And he was a solid, burly man.
More than once I tried to overtake him in laying a brick course – no go.
He would finish when I still had to lay some ten bricks.
And he was very judicious.
Only once his common sense gave in.
That time he brought to the construction site his double-barreled hunting rifle after the midday break. 
The site was in ‘no man, but builders' land' at the edge of the At-Seven-Winds. 
And then a young construction superintendent Sereda, stopped by from the SMP-615 base grounds.
Grigory Grigoryevich allowed him too to hold the weapon.
He even started an argument, that Sereda would not even hit his hat thrown up into the air.

We went around the end wall of the unfinished building.
It was the white silence all around and only the tree trunks of a distant forest belt were contrasting the snow with their dark.
And he threw his hat up—high, so high—and Sereda waited for a second and pulled the trigger. 
The hat twitched in its flight and fell like a hit bird.
Grigory Grigoryevich raised it and there was a hole in the hat top, two fingers easily ran through.
The buckshot turned out to be too large, for boars.
But it had been a good hat of nutria fur.
It's only he did not consider logically that Sereda was from Transcarpathia and though there remained no Bandera men already the firearms survived, hence the skills. 

And the rigger Vera Sharapova was never sad.
She was singing all the time, laughing.
Ready to keep up a talk with anyone.
And she also was the most beautiful, but only at work, while dressed in her workman padded jacket and spetzovka pants.
But when she changed to go by the local train to her Kukolka station the beauty disappeared somewhere.

I do not know why it made me sad when she was telling about her wedding party and everyone around laughed along with her.
‘The kids a-crying, Peter a-playing!’
Peter was that humpback mujik who took her even with two children of hers.
He also was an itinerant from Kukolka to Konotop and knew how to play the accordion. 
Some noisy wedding it turned out.

Vera Sharapova was very keen and she noticed that when someone complained of having a headache I would take out a handkerchief from my spetzovka pants pocket and turn it inside out.
At times she would nudge Katerina, say, watch the miracles of my training, then press her hand to her forehead and make a pain-ridden face:
‘Oh, what a headache I have!’
I, naturally, saw through all that comedy, but nonetheless, I did my role in the procedure. 
However, when Katerina also started to rub her temples, I would say that the reception was over – the facility served one patient per day.
Harry Potter had not been conceived yet.

Peter Lysoon was not always a bricklayer. 
Earlier in his career, he had a job of a security in railway gold transportation. 
There was a special squad of armed securities to accompany safes in luggage cars.
They had long trips, sometimes for weeks.
The floor of the car swayed to the clang of wheel pairs on the rail joints and thoughts of all sorts were spinning on and on.
Say, what way, for example, that gold could be taken?
One day they were spinning, another day – sometimes for weeks at a stretch. 
But no spinning could bring an answer to that insoluble problem.
He would take a look at the faces of his fellow securities – they were also thoughtful.
And what about?
And then a fear started to creep in – what if some of them had thought out a working solution?
Readied a plan, found accomplices, and at some point of the endless way trash all the squad with one clip and leave with the gold? 

Peter got tired of waiting and became a bricklayer...

With his skinny, short stature, Grinya reminded me somehow of German general Guderian whom I never saw in my life. 
There was in his appearance something vaguely suggestive of the General Stuff, more exactly that of the Wehrmacht.
On weekends he took rest from blitzkriegs and went on a fishing trip with Grigory Grigoryevich.
Everywhere in the reach of local and diesel trains.
They were fishing with fishing rods of different length, longer in the summer, short for ice fishing.

I was bribed by his faith in my healing talent.
That time he stopped me on the flight of stairs leading just to heaven because of absence any roof yet.
‘Sehryoga, help!’
And, lifting his upper lip, he showed a whitish pimple on the gum.
Then he unfastened the safety pin from the inside pocket of his workman padded jacket, where he kept his wristwatch during working hours and handed it to me: 
‘Pierce the bitch, it hurts too much.’
I started excuses that it was not possible there amid the dust and mud, without antiseptics.
The operation needed disinfection.
‘What disinfection do you want of me here?’
In some movies, they were disinfecting things with open fire.

He held the pin tip over a lit match.
The result did not comfort me – the tip got covered with black soot.
Grinya critically examined the pin, wiped the soot against the sleeve of his padded jacket with layers of brick dust and other sediments and held it out to me:
‘Take! Do it!’
And I shut up. 
The man spent so many efforts on disinfection...

Mykola Khizhnyak appeared in Konotop as those dark-haired and curly heroes of French novels that come to Paris with a couple of sous in their pockets and ambitious plans to conquer the capital.
True, he had a three-ruble bill and, instead of a slouch hat with a feather, there was a forage cap on his head, incapable to protect in the thirty-degree frost on the night of his arrival. 
He had not become the Captain of musketeers but he is the only bricklayer of the sixth category known to me.

As such, he had an apartment and a motorcycle Ural without a stroller and his wife Katerina and, if you could not get sleep at night, you could grab her by the ears and pull under.

And it was Mykola Khizhnyak making up for the knowledge I omitted at the institute.
When studying at English Department of the NGPI, I could not force myself to read a single work by Thomas Hardy, although he was in the examination questions.
Somehow, I had incompatibility with him.
Probably, because of his name, I don’t know.
I knew, that it was necessary, but I couldn’t.

Once on the slabs, Mykola began to tell me a long and winding story.
At first I thought it was some TV series and only at the very end, when the pursuit overtook her, but she was asleep from fatigue and he said to let her sleep a bit while she did not know she got caught I realized that it was ‘Tess of the D'Urbervilles' notwithstanding that Khizhnyak had woven some flight ticket into the plot... 
