
But officially the most beautiful woman on our team was the rigger, Katerina. 
Vera Sharapova never hesitated to say it her directly, even though she knew it herself, especially since she was the foreman's wife, even though not registered, but they had already had a seventh grader son from her first marriage. 

On her head, Katerina wore a scarf made of a translucent fabric over her yellow curls, and on her neck a necklace of large red beads. 
To suit the color of the lipstick on her lips.

Somewhere in the stacks of bridging slabs, by the heap of dumped mortar, she had a triangular fragment of a thick mirror to look into at her spare time.
She considered herself as beautiful as Anfisa from the TV series ‘The Ugryum River’ after she became the vision because of whom Gromov flung himself off the cliff.

In any case, it was with that spook gesture that she beckoned to me from the brick debris scattered on the ground when I was laying the corner of the fourth floor, the morning after that series: 
‘Come on, Proshka! Come to me!’
Or maybe she just wanted to check if I was crazy enough for the dive.
After all, it was clear that the one was not all there and even turned away from a live porn. 

That time two couples wanted to have a sex in the bosom of nature and left the city for a distance of two hundred meters from the At-Seven-Winds.
They used the strip of bush as a screen from the highway.

Pissing with passion, they did not take into account the nearby construction site and our team put their hand tools aside and exchanged expert comment during the combined action, like the Romans in the stands of Coliseum, when it did not yet require major repairs.

(...in the stagnation era in our land they did not yet know a totalizator so there were no betting on which of the mating pairs will cum first…) 

But how relative is everything in this world!
You come first and Anna Andreyevna, sitting over the shovel handle, thrown across the iron box with mortar, would say: 
‘Phui! And that's your best?' 

And only the one that not all there, turned away, sat low by the brick pallet and watched in the opposite direction with a distant group of birches in the middle of ‘no man, but builders’ land’ as tall as the trees in the African Savannah.
A normal one wouldn’t behave like that...

Before his marriage, Peter Kyrpa lived with his mother and in the winter season kept bragging regularly how on the morning of that day he went out into their hutta’s corridor-hallway broke the ice in the bucket with a tin mug and drank the water so cold that it was entering the teeth.
I liked him less than anyone else on our team, but it became him who had helped me to prove to everyone and, moreover, to myself that I was a true bricklayer.
It happened much later when the fresh blood in the form of two girls who graduated from a vocational school someplace in Western Ukraine and the former paratrooper Vovka joined our team.

At that time we were finishing the second floor of the machine shop floor building opposite the canteen for the locomotive driving teams.
When the brick wall reaches 1.2 meters it is continued from trestles put close by it.
Between Kyrpa and me there were two of such trestles which accounts for a distance of about 15 meters.
He wanted to show off before the pair of young girls in fresh padded jackets, who often used in their talk the funny sounding ‘yoy!’
So he shouted:
‘Here, Sehryoga!’
And he hurled a hammer in my direction over the pallets and boxes in between us two.
The tool flew like a tomahawk spinning around its hilt. 

I did not have time for calculations and I did not calculate anything.
I just stepped forward and raised my right hand.
The moment as the hammer handle touched my palm all there remained to do was to squeeze my fingers in a grab.
Everything turned out all by itself.

Seeing that I did not duck behind the brick pallet to evade his throw but that I stood with the hammer held in my proudly raised hand, Kyrpa flip-flopped at once and said to the girls who suddenly turned mute:
‘That’s what bricklayers are there on our team!’
So I have something to be proud of in my life...

In addition to the rubber doll from the village store, I collected a whole gift set for your birthday.
There were those glossy plastic what-you'd-call-thems which electricians insert into the junction boxes.
They looked like little ninja turtles, although before the production of that cartoon there remained more than twenty years.
The pieces’ similarity to turtles was evident at once only it wasn’t discovered yet that they were ninjas.
Besides, there were white ceramic checkers.
All the set items in two pieces, except for the doll.

(...this, like, a soldier on the front collects a present from brass shot cartridges.
However, our team was indeed at the forefront of the world mastered by humans.
Gifts from the edge of the ecumene…) 

It was important for me to get to Nezhin at a fitting time when no one would intercept and spoil the holiday.
The local train from Konotop, moreover on your birthday, was easy to ambush with a black and white tartan and then just a slight swishing touch against my jeans and all’s derailed.
It was wiser to approach from the rear where I could not be expected from.

The bus Kharkov-Chernigov suited the purpose ideally but it passed Konotop five thirty in the morning that’s why I did not go to sleep that night so as not to oversleep.
I was just walking around Konotop in different directions.

When I walked along the concrete wall of the Meat-Packing Plant there was a crowd of cattle driven through the roofed gallery up there to the slaughter work floor.
With what human voices they were screaming!
Worse than in ‘The Western Corridor’.
And, they absolutely got it – where they were being driven and why.

About midnight I was on the Kandybino and decided to take a swim.
I stripped down and entered the water in the altogether. 
And who would see?
The dark currant bushes on the shore, or the stars with the moon?
They had seen more than that.
And I plunged ahead.

And the darkness around was trembling with frogs moans.

One plasterer, an elderly female already, but sporting long tight braids, told me that when she wanted to commit suicide in her village, the same night it was and the air was filled with buzzing whisper:
‘Come on! Here it is, the pond! Go into!' 
But I did not have any voices, only the frogs.

And then I swam towards the moon.
It had just risen over the fish lakes and didn’t have time to grow little in the sky.
The huge full moon.

I swam with sidestroke, soundlessly, but still pushed waves before me.
Smooth evenly rounded waves, like those lines printed in the handkerchief with the sailboat.
Only there they were blue on a white background and here silver against black darkness.
And they were moving, as the waves of ether, until pond weed began to cling to my feet.
It was scary, all slimy mermaids came on thought and I swam back, but already on my back so that to watch the moon all the time.

My hair was wet after swimming and I slowly strolled to the station so that it would dry on the way.
At the station, there were huge clocks on the front and back walls, and two more inside, in the halls. 
That’s why I went to the station.
I did not have a watch, when I tried to wear one or another on my wrist it would stop in a day or two, or they started to show a wrong time and should be taken to repair or replaced with a new one.

Along the way, I remembered that unfortunate guy from the Arab Nights fairy tales who cried all the time and kept tearing the clothes on his chest. 
He loved a beautiful sorceress, and she loved him but warned that a certain door in her palace should never be opened. 
And he opened it—out of pure curiosity—and got into another dimension with only sand and stones around and no way back. 
Then all that remained to him was to cry and beat himself in the chest...

About two years before that I went with Eera to the Desna river.
Just we two, she and I.
Gaina Mikhailovna was keeping you that day.
We went there by the morning bus to Chernigov.
And how would we return?
Well, something would turn up…

When I saw the Desna through the bus window, I asked the driver to pull up and we got off to the highway.
Then we were going over a field.
In another, nearby field, women in white kerchiefs were raking hay into mounds, from afar you could not make out what century you were in.
Then I carried Eera on my back over a channel to a long spit of sand overgrown with wide green leaves past which the Desna flowed.
We spread a blanket over the leaves and spent all day there.

When I felt a need to take a leak I swam to the other bank, the river was not too wide there.
Eera had strictly warned me not to drench my head.
I remembered that and all the same from the other, steep bank I plunged headlong into the river.
And now all that’s left was to cry and tear that acetate silk summer T-shirt on my chest...

The rest of that night I sat on the square between the station and the first platform.
The benches there were not very comfortable, without the backrests.
Sitting on one of them I met rare night trains, along with the trolleys of the on-duty workers from the luggage office to which the workers of postal cars threw out boxes and bales of parcels.
And from the same bench, I was seeing off the groups of chilly yawning passengers. 
Have a good trip.
When the black box of the clock on the front wall of the station lit up 05:00, I went to the waiting hall to collect the cardboard box with the gifts from the automatic storage cell and from there to the bus station.
It’s close by, almost immediately behind the Loony park.

The Kharkov-Chernigov bus did not pass through Nezhin, but from the turn of the highway with the round building of the traffic police post, there again something turned up so that about nine in the morning I was already in Nezhin.
At that time the local train from Konotop was only approaching Bakhmach.

But I did not want to be a bolt from the blue. 
That's why I called Eera at her workplace from a pay phone booth. 
What a beautiful voice she had!
So mellow, so dear.
I said that I wanted to see you and present a birthday gift and she answered that, yes, of course, that you were at home with her mother. 

I went to Red Partisans with joy churning in my chest because Eera on the phone sounded quite friendly and even somehow pleased.

The door did not open, only the peephole darkened momentarily and brightened up again.

I pushed the doorbell button again, but shorter, and I heard footsteps cautiously departing from the hallway.
I also heard your voice complaining about something from the doorway to the living room and how your grandmother was shushing you in a whisper. 

If a person has voices from a psychiatry textbook, they tell him something.

I couldn’t make out any words but through the door I could clearly see you, a four-year-old kid, anxiously looking up at your grandma – who’s there? the gray wolf? a bad uncle?
And I saw Eera’s mother in the six-month perm-wave with her finger pressed to her lips:
‘Shush!’

I am not of those who break into a locked door, and I did not want to scare you any further.

I rang to the opposite door on the landing and it opened.
There lived a pair of teachers at the NGPI.
Groza-husband, he taught scientific Communism, and Groza-wife, who was teaching me German in my second year of study there.
I left the box with the Grozas and asked to hand it to you personally.

And to Konotop I could return already by a local train.
What’s the difference?
Just 1 ruble 10 kopecks...

(...an attempt to live a righteous life causes a bad habit in a person.
Not a detrimental one, but, at any rate, meaningless – you fall in the rut of that business and keep on even knowing there’s no difference…)

After the final and even ritually confirmed break-up with Eera, the return of ‘The Godfather’—the last of the books I had stolen—made no sense, but it was too late, I got addicted.

The book stayed by me because I did not know where Vitya Kononevich was appointed to work, but then I got the information that it was not Zhora from whom Vitya borrowed the book, but from Sasha Nesterook, her real owner.
I had to go to Nezhin again.

When I came to the address given to me by Vasya Kropin, Sasha Nesterook was not there.
The place was already rented by a young married couple.
The young man wore a white tank-shirt, his wife a dressing gown and the apartment richly smelled with grease smoked herring.
What else could be needed for happiness?
An apartment, a young woman at any time of the day.

I refused the address of their landlady who, perhaps, knew where Sasha Nesterook moved.
Stopping the search, I went back to Konotop.
I remembered that in the last year at the institute, Igor Recoon became close friends with Nesterook.
My intention was to give the book to Igor and let him pass it instead of me.
Anyway, I got fed up with the path of righteousness.

On the train, I for the first time was visited by the thought – maybe just so it was necessary? 
A woman of your own, of course, is a good thing, whichever way you turn it, but why then I did not envy the young lodger?
And why was I tickled with an inexplicable laughter when recollecting the herring and white tank-top?. 

Igor’s mother said that he was not at home and that he worked on the first floor in the building of the City Party Committee.
That building was by the Peace Square, behind the gray monument of Lenin where once stood the tower of the city television studio before it was dismantled.

At the entrance to the City Party Committee, I told the militiaman which room and to whom I was going to and he let me pass. 

The room was empty, but the moment I came up to the window, Igor got in.
He obviously did not want me to see what I saw.

He had not changed at all.
The same glasses of tea color in a golden frame and the same smirk on the sharp face.
Only the air got condescending.
Clear enough!
The man got on the rails of a wide road to a brighter future.
‘The Godfather’ almost failed to surprise him and he promised to pass the book to Sasha Nesterook.

Probably, it's nice to feel superior to someone who, when entering the NGPI, looked so much superior to you because he was after the army and you only a month before had received your school certificate. 
But now he was slavering on a construction site and you had an office in the City Party Committee, albeit having to share the office room with another functionary.

And I have never met Igor again, but I managed to catch a glimpse through the window in his career-starting room and see the strip of the cracked asphalt of the blind area under the wall, the sun-killed lawn, and the facade plaster ‘coat’ on the blank opposite wall, under opaque gray whitewashing and – nothing else.

To whatever heights had he risen in his future career, he would never see that group of birches among the construction sites of the At-Seven-Winds that looked like tall trees in the summer haze of African Savannah.
Even if you point at them, he would not see...

Still, I was persistently harassed by a sticky hope…
Eera’s voice, that talked to me on the phone seemed so joyful.
What if?. 

And it was nothing of her fault that my mother-in-law decided to expose me before you as a brutal door-kicker.
She certainly had not even consulted with Eera, whose voice sounded like my Eera’s voice…

To certify these hopes, I went to the Intercity Telephone Station, next to the Main Post Office.

The glass door and walls separated me from the noise of the tramcars and fuss in front of the Department Store.
The woman behind the glass barrier along the counter wrote down the city and the number I was calling. 

She passed the receipt to me and I paid for a three-minute talk.
She took off the receiver from the phone on her desk and told someone to give Nezhin, 4-59-83.
I slipped the receipt into the back pocket of my jeans and became one of the few waiting. 

When somewhere in another city someone was picking the receiver off the ringing phone they were told that it was Konotop online and the black loudspeaker in the station hall shouted in a female voice which booth to go in for a talk with that city. 

Behind the glass inserted in the door of the indicated booth, a light bulb lit up revealing a narrow compartment squeezed by yellow chipboard plates. 
The expectant entered the said booth with the phone on a small plywood shelf in the corner next to the crimson-plush covered seat of a high stool.
I do not know if it’s soft or hard, I have never sat down.

‘Alma-Ata! The number does not answer! What will you do?’
‘Repeat!’
In the loudspeaker floated up a distant echoing of long telephone rings in the faraway Alma-Ata.

‘Petrozavodsk! Cabin Twelve!’

What they were talking about could not be heard from the station hall, unless they started to yell because of a faulty connection.

‘Alma-Ata! The number does not answer! What will you do?’
‘Take off!’
The one with impracticable expectations returned the receipt and got their money back.

‘Nezhin's online!' 

I entered the booth and turned my back to the station hall behind the glass in the upper half of the door.
It’s very difficult to talk with your heart going pit-a-pat up in your throat.

‘Call Eera, please.’
‘Who’s talking?’
‘Sehrguey Ogoltsoff.’
‘Now...’

‘Yes.’
And the beating at once receded, clenched by the permafrost breath coming from her voice.

I said hello, was saying something else but I heard that I could never get through that dead tightened ice.

‘Look, I’m not asking anything, but the girl needs a father.’
‘Do not worry, she has a father already.’
‘Yes? It’s.. good.’
The conversation was over.

I went directly to the exit but in the glass cage of its vestibule, I looked back at the booth where the light had already gone out. 
And I said to myself:
‘Look well, number seven. That’s the number where you get crucified.’...

Where is the UK, and where is Konotop, but – lo and behold! – because of that kingdom, or rather because of that kingdom's communists, and, to the pointed point, because of their ‘Morning Star' newspaper that summer, I missed the wedding of my sister Natasha. 

After all, if you think carefully, it’s ‘Morning Star’ to be blamed for my re-entry into the madhouse.

(…With the daily reading of news that half a month before were news in foggy Albion you begin to sympathize with the Labor movement and the names of Michael Foote and Tony Benn become not so empty as the names of Suslov, or Podgorny, or whoever else was among the members of that Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the CPSU. 
The head of British government, Margaret Thatcher ceases to be ‘Dear Mrs. Margaret Thatcher!’, as read by Brezhnev out from the sheet of his welcome speech.
She becomes that iron bitch who starved to death twenty-nine Irish guys who wanted to wear sweaters in their prison cells.
That is, there is a shift towards an inadequate perception of the surrounding realities. 
You start to behave like a miner from Kent County or a public utility worker in the city of Manchester. 

Of course, I could refer to the lack of awareness – after all, I lived in the era of stagnation and did not suspect about it.
However, this is a weak excuse, because equally ignorant of the fact was the KGB officer, who answered the phone call from the SMP-615…)

At the height of summer, when the battle for the harvest was unfolding on the fields of our Homeland, when the miners of Kuzbass region promised to give out the millionth ton of black gold in the current year, when he, the mentioned KGB officer, still could not make up his mind whether to go on Saturday to his dacha in the Zholdaky village, or still drive to the Desna river, from where the second week at a stretch mujiks were returning with a good catch…
The telephone rang.
Emergency Accident.
There’s a strike in the SMP-615 and sit-down demonstration.
How many strikers?
One.
Where exactly?
On the porch of the administrative building.
‘Do nothing before the arrival of our staff.’

Yes, I was sitting on the wide concrete two-step porch of the two-story administrative building.
Yes, it was a strike, because at ten in the morning, instead of chinking my trowel against the bricks being laid in the course, I changed clothes in our team trailer in the At-Seven-Winds and showed up at the base of the SMP-615.
Yes, it was a sit-down strike and so as to be seated with more comfort I took a wooden chair from the watchman house at the gate and dragged it onto the porch of the administrative building.

It was a classic summer day, in the blue sky above the production building a huge mass of a single, brightly white cloud hung motionlessly. 
Along the high railway embankment, express trains flew past the mortar unit hastily knock-knocking on, the cars of freight trains heavily pounded along. 

It was a casual busy day and only I did nothing yet sweating in that blue shirt of acetate silk which is the same crap as nylon, just a little softer. 

I was sitting on the side of the entrance, so as not to accidentally obstruct the way to passing employees of the SMP-615.
Two locksmiths, the husbands of Lyda and Vita from our team, stopped by to ask why I was here and not at work.
Without explanations, I pointed with my thumb at the labor performance board of brown linoleum, placed on the same porch, but on the other side of the entrance.
And the chief mechanic himself guessed to read it.

Actually, that board was hung for life in the lobby on the first floor, next to the shut up window out of which once a month we received our payment.
And the board chastely kept the virginity of its linoleum, although a piece of chalk was put on its frame.

That day the board’s star time had stricken and out it went and stood there covered with the pompous handwriting from which, without any graphology, anyone could at once see a graphomaniac:

‘Our trade union boss is a liar!
Down with Slaushevsky!’

I knew if that had happened anywhere in England, young representatives from both factions of the Labor Party would have already been photographed next to the board, and the reporters of that same ‘Morning Star’ would have already interviewed me – where from such a militant intolerance towards the trade union leader?

Until that morning, I also had just sympathy for him. 

The foreman of carpenters, Anatoly Slaushevsky, had a pleasant appearance under the milky gray hair.
In Hollywood, he would easily have made a career in the line of a noble sheriff in various Westerns. 
But we also kept a noble look in a high esteem and Slaushevsky was year after year elected the chairman of the trade union committee of the SMP-615.
The position, mind you, was not paid, so he also lived on just one salary. 
Like everyone else.
