
And he thought that I would understand him, like everyone else, when he told me on the site that morning:
‘No go.’
‘How's that "no go"?' 
‘Just so that no go.’

Could he have supposed that he would get accosted with the defamatory name of ‘boss’, by white on brown, and attached demand of putting him in an unaccustomed position?

Sympathy is a short-living thing.

A month before I would readily give him a hug when he told me there was a permit to the Artek pioneer camp. 
Yes, I wanted it, sure thing!
All my pioneer childhood I dreamed of visiting the sunny Artek on the Crimean coast.
Now, I, naturally, did not fit there with my age anymore, but Lenochka would be happy to see the Black Sea. 

In fact, Lenochka got a little scared and began to ask her grandmother, who responded that Artek was very good.
And Lenochka had already passed all the doctors from the children polyclinic with their medical checks.
She even made her choice which suitcase she would take with her for keeping her things in Artek.

‘No go.’

A month before Slaushevsky did not yet know that someone else would guess that Artek was good.
That’s why he offered to me the permit paid for by the trade union.
And it did not matter that the smart late-comer, to whom some manager from the SMP-615 boasted about having such a permit, was from another organization.
Anyway, his position in his organization was higher than that of a bricklayer.

‘No go.’

If you live on just one salary, you must think rationally.
As everyone else.
Grunt, scratch in the back of your neck, say ‘fuck!’, and go to your workplace.
What’s the use of showing your horns to Slaushevsky?
He’s also like everyone else...

I knew how all that would evolve in England but I had no idea what would happen next here in my native country. 
So, my role was that of an on-looker in acetate silks, only I had to unbutton a couple of buttons, it was a too hot day.

Around the white-brick corner of the administrative building slowly came a white Volga.
It made a wide turnabout on the fine dust of the road surface and pulled up in front of the porch with its nose to where it had come from. 

The driver got out, leaving two passengers in the back seat, climbed the porch, read the two lines on the linoleum of the monthly labor performance board and, without looking at me, entered the building.

He soon returned, got back into the car and his two burly passengers came out of it and approached me.
‘Let’s go.’
‘Where?’
‘You’ll see.’

It’s inconvenient to talk turning your face up in two directions.
I got up and put my hand on the back of the chair.
‘Okay, I just take the chair back.’
‘They’ll take it without you.’
And each of them had already grabbed my biceps with both his hands – each one from his side.
Gently and slowly they led me to the Volga.

In the distant shade of the doorway to the production building, a monitoring group of two locksmiths and one welder stood watching. 
From the painting of Repin ‘The Arrest of a Propagandist'. 

The archangel on the left, seeing how obedient I was, loosened his grip a little.
He was already, like, strolling along with a comradely hold on my arm.
I shouted to the driver:
‘The left one is shirking!’
The grips got balanced and soon the three of us sit down in the back seat with me in the center.
Like the king on the coronation day.

While Svaytsikha was opening the gate – the first and last time I saw it locked – I shouted to her to take back from the porch the chair I had borrowed from her workplace.
And the Volga drove to Konotop.

After some other gate, they told me to get over into a small UAZ wan with no windows in the back. 
One of the burly guys got in with me.
Soon we stopped again.
Through the windshield in the driver cab, there were seen the poplars nearby the City Medical Center. 

After a prolonged wait, the back door swung open. 
On the sidewalk stood the psychiatrist Tarasenko.
‘Yes, it’s him.’
After those his words, the door slammed shut again and I was taken to Romny. 
Without any voluntariness on my part...

Your looks depend on how favorable to you feels the mirror you are looking in.
I had noticed it more than once.
In some mirror – wow! – I’m really gorgeous!
While in another – is that ghoul I?

The most in-love-with-me-mirror I had ever met, was the pier glass in the hall of the fifth unit of the regional psychiatric hospital in the city of Romny.
It showed me how much handsome a man I was, after all.
And without any cinematic sweetness – just a really comely man.

In those three months in Odessa, I looked like Konkin, or he was made up to look like me when starring in ‘The Meeting Place Cannot Be Changed’.
And it did not matter much, who’s like who, the main thing that there, from the pier glass, at me was looking a man of unusual for stereotyped standards handsomeness by Titian's brush.

The red pajamas with thin yellow stripes, brown soft hair slightly lightened with their sunburn, but the main advantage was the color of the eyes.
An unprecedented, inimitable color – that of a melting honey.

And let Captain Pissak, composing my verbal portrait in front of the ranks of the first company, say:
‘Look at his eyes! They are lynx’s eyes!’
But no, Captain, the pier glass would not lie – they were good!
The only pity was that no one saw it except me.

The hall was empty and the corridor was quiet. 
A dozen of patients stayed in the observation wardroom and all the rest of the fifth unit the entire daylight hours were kept– with the break for midday meal – on the Area.
It’s summer, after all!.

When, at the experimental unit of the Repair Work Shop of the KaPeVeRrZe Plant, we, at the end of the working day, were waiting until expired the most slow-go final half hour and, leaning back against the vices, were yakking of this and that, and, in general, of nothing, some younger locksmiths agreed that it would be nice to get back to the army again, but only now, when you already knew what’s what, and, well, not for the full stretch of two years, but, let’s say, a week, or two, or maybe for a month...

To me, then pre-conscript, such conversation seemed unconvincing, yet now I’m ready to agree, that the same phenomena might look different.
At the first sight through the roundly perplexed eyes things look one way, but when you watch them from the height of the accumulated experience, they acquire quite different looks.
And one month is a trifle.
The madhouse does not lock you up for less than forty-five days.

Forty-five days is half a season – half the summer, or half the spring, or wherever they put you there. 

As a regular of the fifth unit, I already knew that and some other nuances, however, I had not been there in summer.

For me, as an unmitigated recidivist, they no longer cared to spend expensive insulin.
That time I was not treated there, but getting punished with iminazine.

Three executions per day multiplied by forty-five.
I knew what mess they would do of my ass in the following half of the season.

And, as a cheaper patient, I was placed in a larger wardroom, number eight.
The more the number of sick people spending the night around, the higher chance of listening to their screams from nightmares, or witnessing a showdown under the light of inexorable electric bulbs. 

(...every summer has its minuses and, first of all, the influx.
Any resident of any resort would agree – on the arrival of those crowds, the standard of living takes a nosedive…)

In the summer, the fifth unit served, on average, 40 more patients than in other seasons.
To provide everyone with a place to sleep, in wardroom eight, for example, two side-by-side beds served to accommodate from three to four men a night, depending on how lucky you were.
In that half season, I was lucky both ways. 

But there was a huge ‘but!’ – the summer removed the problem of the washed and therefore locked toilet because we spent all day in the Area.

The Area was a square 40 by 40 meters.
The three sides of its perimeter, including the one in which the gate, were thick gray unpainted planks, vertically nailed side by side, 2.2 meters tall.
The fourth side was a large iron mesh 2 meters high from the ground.


Along the plank part of the fence lying in the base of the square, there stretched a thirty-meter canopy with its low gable roof of rusty tin propped by rare pillars of red brick.
Under the canopy, there was a high heap of broken iron beds. 
Two, still alive ones stood by the slope with a cloth blanket thrown over the springy mesh of each one.
When the syringes with midday injections were brought down to the Area, the patients, called by their names, were coming to the beds to pull their pants down, lie with their backs up, get their dosage into, one by one.

A pair of armchairs on rust-eaten legs, with their leatherette cover in tatters, were leaned, so as not to collapse, against the brick pillars – they were seats of paramedics.
At the far end of the canopy, near the mesh fence, there stood two or three short plywood benches with rigid backs like those of school desks.

Along the parallel plank fence over the square, three separate longboards were nailed to short logs sticking from the ground to form three consecutive backrest-less benches. 
Three benches of the same design stretched along the third plank fence with the gate in it.

The iron mesh fence opposite the gate had nothing by to sit upon, but near it—in the right upper corner of the Area—there stood toilet of the ‘sortier’ type: a box of three tin walls under equally rusty tin roof.
The door was missing for paramedics to be sure that the patient inside was not attempting a suicide and not allowing himself too much some other way.

The ground surface in the Area was bare and firm with an admixture of clay and dust trampled out of it. 

And that’s all?
No!

There were as many as two ‘but!’ – the strip of green, not trampled grass along the other side of the mesh fence and the summer sky with white clouds on top of everything and anything.

The sun was rising from behind the fifth unit building and the shadow thrown back by the roof started the inconspicuous movement from the iron mesh to the opposite plank fence.
While we were taken to the midday meal, the shadow passed over the fence and we did not find it anymore, and the sun in the sky was still steadily moving on – to the construction site of a one-story building, about six meters from the iron mesh fence, and even further over the site, until it disappeared altogether and the clearly delineated evening shadow started creeping up the wall of the fifth unit, right up to its roof, where it would dissolve in the dusk, which meant that now they would take us up to the unit for the end-day meal and overnight.
But before that, we all, of course, washed out feet in the vestibule on the first floor. 

All 120 people, in turn, would step, one after another, into one and the same tin basin filled with one and the same water.
Two halfwits, kneeling on the floor behind the basin, would wipe all their feet, in turn, with one and the same pair of wafer towels.
There was something of biblical air about the rite...

I met about ten familiar faces.
Tsyba, on the very first evening, hastily approached me in the corridor, gave a brief glance and turned away:
‘Eew! Not the same!’
And he never wanted to communicate with me anymore.

Sasha, who knew my brother Sasha, remained sporting close-cropped hair, but he was asleep all the time. 
In the morning, after our joyful piling in through the gate into the Area, he stretched on the bed for injections and only by the middle of the day drowsily gave part of it for laying, in turn, with back up, of those whose execution syringes had been brought down.

The first one and a half hour in the Area I usually spent laying on one of the board-benches along the plank fence. 
Behind it, there was the area of the fourth unit, where howling and squealing were as mighty as ours. 
Sometimes I had someone from the slightly inflated standing above me to mutter it was unfair to take up so much space for one person.
Then I had to lower my legs on the ground and sit up because I could not send him to the three board-benches along the plank fence with the gate in it – that was the grounds of the fully emancipated gymnosophists. 

They communicated with screams, being cooked in their own juice of a free life, inattentive that the skin of their bare bodies, getting sunburned day after day, was oozing with blood, which, eventually, got baked, though.

Now, the leader of the community where no one cared about anyone else, bored with the monotony of his swinging back and forth in a sitting position, issued a Tarzan howl and plunged for a couple of meters deep into the Area just to come back to the board-bench and go on with his swinging. 
Along the way, he just kicked a philosopher of the same ceramic-burned hue, squatting to get closer to the ground to draw with his finger in the dust below his hanging balls.
'Noli turbare circulos meos!' 

Next time he would knock down with one blow another naked neighbor from the bench who wouldn't even notice that concentratedly spinning between his fingers a sixteen-centimeter piece of a broken twig. 

The paramedics never intervened into the internal affairs on the benches of deep introverts as long as the howl-squeal-screaming in their free territories did not bypass the notch permissible level.
When it was transgressed, the paramedics assisted by volunteers from halfwits, or nuts would pull the completely raging from the board-benches and fix him on the second alive bed under the canopy.

When the heat drove me away from the Area, I sat down on one of the plywood benches ignored by the crazy public because of their inconvenient backrests.
Indeed, to sit through the whole day on a firm horizontal plane was not an easy task, in the evening you did not know which of your buttocks to use for sitting.

The Area itself was in the state of constant motion: back and forth, to and fro, circles, jerky tags…
Where to? What for?

At the plank fence behind the board-benches on which I was lying in the morning, lined a rank of sick replacing each other people stuck to the gaps between the nailed planks.
Someone giggled into the gap, another one beckoned a fellow patient, someone else jerked off in his pants because of the fourth unit, being at the same level of mental development, kept the patients of the opposite sex of all levels including the stark naked gymnosophisticated ones. 

These are just my assumptions, though, because I myself never approached the gaps in the fence and had seen only one of our neighboresses.

Black-haired and skinny, about thirty years old, she emerged waist-deep over the fence and with a gently waving movement of her arm threw a large flower into the dust under our feet.
The nuts kicked up a skirmish over her flower and she was pulled away from the other side of the fence, but the breasts were of a beautiful shape all the same.

Three times a day, to stretch the buttocks puffy from the shots, I left the shade of the canopy and walked around the Area in wide circles.
While promenading, I memorized by heart the lines of ‘The Novel in Pictures’ conceived by me yet in the wild but which had finally taken its shape already here.

The content did not exceed one page of text and it was important for me not to lose a single coma and prevent substitution of words with synonyms because I was arrested without a pencil and paper on me. 

One time, too deeply immersed in the punctuation of unwritten lines, I inadvertently crossed the invisible line along the board-benches of the absolutely free and two or three punches on the body and into my head brought me back to the surrounding reality...

I could not allow that reality to break my system of survival in the void.
So on Sundays, I went to the beach. 

I dragged two plywood benches out under the mesh fence—away from the free ones—and all day long was sunbathing, with breaks for the midday meal and when they called me come under the canopy and get my syringe into the ass. 

So I lay there all the day with my eyes closed under the hot sun, and the surrounding background noise accurately reproduced the shrieks and squeals of a crowded summer beach.

On admission to the fifth unit, instead of underpants, they gave me long johns with strips for tying them on the ankles. 
However hard I tried, I couldn’t roll them up above my knees.
I had to surrender in the end and at the plywood bench beach I pulled them off and wrapped my loins in the tank top.

One Sunday, the head doctor was on duty herself and got utterly shocked with the frivolity of my costume. 
‘And this is a person with a higher education!’ indignantly exclaimed she from under the canopy.

How did she figure out there was nothing under the tank shirt but me in the altogether? 
She was helped by the rhyme-riddle for kids about ‘A and B’ and the rule of thumb:
If the pajamas put under the head, and the blood smeared long johns on the back of the bench – what horn remained in the tank top? 

The day after she drenched the reputation of my past, I was approached by Tarattoon, from the new wave of the patients.
He invited me to collaborate in the creation of a nuclear bomb for which purpose they had already collected a good working group.
And I said, thank you, yet, said I, the task called for splitting nuclei and I had been fed up with even just a bare idea of breaking, breakers and so on and forth along the line.
He never repeated the invitation...

Among the paramedics there also popped up new faces.

The man of short stature with a beautiful head of crisp red hair and the broken right leg, for example.
Or maybe, it just was shorter, but he was heavily falling on that side.

The other one was a slender black-haired youth in an immaculately white medical coat. 
He was the only one to call me with the plural ‘You’ and planning to enter a medical institute in Leningrad.
In the meantime he gave me injections above my pulled down pants and long johns and—to comfort me—he kept complaining sympathetically that there simply no place remained to stab into, that’s why it’s bleeding so.

One evening, when we banzai-ing and hurrahing came back from the Area, that naked sunburned bodybuilder pressed all of his front (dirty with the dust stuck to his sweat) against the ‘manipulation room' in the hall by the observation wardroom. 
The youth paramedic, so as prevent stains on his snow-white medical coat, drove him away with high kicks of his black shiny shoes.
‘Just think of it! Now the door has to be washed!’
That moment I seemed to understand the naked introvert – to press your sun-smitten body to so a clean, coolness emanating door… even if locked… 

H.G. Wells wrote a novel ‘The Sleeper Awakes’.
The skinhead sleeper of Sasha woke up on the bed under the canopy and, without opening his eyes, pronounced:
‘What a ridiculous name he has – Tarattoon!’
A second later the paramedic's yells mingled with other noise in the Area. 

I turned my head.
Snapping the iron mesh, Tarattoon overcame its two-meter height and disappeared behind the nearby construction site.
The paramedic, falling on his right leg, ran up to the mesh, but had brains enough to figure out that even trying was of no use.
He doffed his medical coat, passed it to his partner paramedic and left.
Soon another paramedic came to fill his place in the tattered armchair. 

The Area was in excited state until the evening, they even stopped masturbating. 
Before the rite of feet washing, the redhead cripple entered the Area, pleased as an elephant,
He had caught that bastard!

We went up to the unit and some of us visited the sixth wardroom where Tarattoon was already lying on his bed, fixed and pacified with the shot of sulfur.
He was dragging on the cigarette butt which one of the halfwits kept in front of his lips and spoke softly.

He fled to the outskirts of the city and hid in the bushes of a deep ravine, no one had seen him there, there were no huttas around.
How could that red-haired bastard have found him at all?

(...and I felt melancholic sadness.
While they got stuck and making a muck out of schizophrenia with their monographs and insulin, what unimaginable horizons of incomprehensible human capabilities are unfolding around! 
How did the sleeping Sasha learn about Tarattoon’s break out a few seconds before it took place?
What led the redhead to the right ravine and that very bush behind which the fugitive had hidden? 

There is a lot of questions, I won't find the answer to. 
Never.
And others don’t care about them at all…)

This tall, emaciated, black-haired young man stood out among the representatives of the new wave,  with a normal expression of his thoughtful face, but he got easily aroused from mere words.
Once he started talking about some fascists who were ready to walk over dead bodies to reach their fascist ends.
I answered with a shrug:
‘The end justifies the means.' 
But he decided that was my way of justifying fascists and flared up immensely.
Still, I was not hit for the unthoughtful clue. 

Incidentally, he also was a construction worker and brought to the fifth unit at eight o’clock in the evening directly from the construction site.
‘Your team work two shifts?’
‘No, we finish at five, I went there just to plan work for the next day.’
Oh, my dear! Did you come to the workplace after five? 
They’re right – your place’s here!.

Ah! Yes!
There was also music in the Area! 
It was being made by a patient with a button accordion.
The repertoire comprised two or three songs:
‘Walking the Don river...’, ‘You’re a cop, I’m a thief...’ and… and that’s all, I think.

The performance of his pieces he began in the morning with the interval of an hour. 
The interval grew shorter and shorter and in the twilight, the numbers were already running one after another and again, and again. 
That way he achieved perfect virtuosity of performance, to which in the evening was also added singing without digressions out of tune.

With those two songs, the accordionist was bringing the Area to an ecstatically orgiastic state, transforming us into a single organism in the evening, where each organ did what it was supposed to do. 
Some sang along in chorus, others started up dancing, even the absolutely free under their ceramic sun-cracked tan began to squeak somehow in time.
I saw an elderly female paramedic, succumbing to the general ecstasy, she also danced and shouted in the circle of halfwits under a yellow light from a bulb in the summer twilight.
That’s not to say that such euphoria rolled over each evening, but it happened.

Then the accordion player was discharged, his forty-five-day stretch was over.
For two days something was missing for us.
But suddenly after a break for the midday meal, smiling with embarrassment, he again appeared in the gate. 
That morning he had put on his necktie and ventured to the city executive committee to point out to them their mistakes in managing affairs of the Romny city...

Ivan Corol, which means ‘king’ in English, would have remained quite normal but the name brought him to megalomania and here he was among us, one of us, but with royally conceited manners.

He was not patronizing the gaps in the fence to the fourth unit, he was a gourmet.
Louis le Roi Soleil.
He lay in ambush for the female plasterers from the nearby construction site to go out on the porch in their mortar splattered spetzovkas.
Then he entered the three-wall box of the tin toilet and staring through the holes in the tin, pierced with erratic nails, and commenced to hastily sweep his palm along his dick—back and forth—standing in profile to the rest of the courtiers in the Area.

And that’s an example for subjects?
On having it away he left the Versailles with the royal ceremonial, albeit exhausted gait.

One of the plasterers took a brush for whitewashing, put it on the porch and started to cut its end with an ax, like, to make it even, or maybe in retaliation. 
A man’s voice cut through the jungle cacophony in the Area:
‘Put a plank under! Making the ax blunt against concrete, you stupid!’
She dropped her jaw, never expecting instructions from that side.
She had thought there were only ceramic ones.
It’s just that I don’t like when they spoil instruments.
Probably, that's a hereditary trait. 

(...as yet, I have only outlined the external contours of the Area, the shell of it.
But what is its essence?
What is the point, if any, in all that chaotically turbulent movement or frozen motionless not giving a fuck for anything?
Does it exist?
Certainly, yes.

The boiling bouillon chaos of the soup from messy lightheaded ingredients and motionless vegetables on the bottom is nothing but a cross-section of the component parts and the current state of the human race. 
The question ‘how tasty is it?’ does not belong here.

So, without much ado, yet strictly to the point, inside the Area, the following five categories are easily distinguishable: 

a) normal, aka specialists, aka paramedics, aka bitches in white, aka etc., etc.;

b) not all there, aka with a phase shift, aka not the same, etc., etc.;

c) crazy, aka schizics, aka halfwits, etc., etc.;

d) nuts, loony, barking mad, etc., etc.;

e) bananas, aka departed, aka irrevocably free, aka etc., etc.

To begin with, you need clearly understand and keep in mind that the boundaries between the above categories are oscillating and overlapping – some medical workers, for instance, are distinguished from certain other forms from the following categories only by the color of the uniform. 
Secondly (and this is of prior importance!), the touchstone that allows for differentiation, is the possibility of using the individual in the interests of the current social formation, which creates those areas.
Such a formation must necessarily be current.

Now in order of appearance.
Those suffering from a ‘phase shift’ are distinguished from the normal ones by their inability always and under any conditions remain the same as everyone else.
Therefore, for all who are like everyone else, they are not all there.
Don Quixote, for example, who was not all home would perfectly fit into the ranks of the normal in the previous formation, where he would be like everyone else. 

Schizics, those incomprehensible geniuses, invent theories of relativity, probability, etc., or write the novel ‘Finnigan's Wake' in the aftermath of which the normal are necessitated to pretend they have understood the slightest bit of crap in all that theories or literary works. 
So, if you try to push forward your crazy ideas without having the appropriate diploma – welcome to the fifth unit!
The hospitable Area is waiting for you!

Nuts are not able to intelligibly expound the logic of their actions, however, having a musculoskeletal apparatus sufficient to move weights, and the ability to reproduce, they are the backbone of any formation.
It’s only that from time to time they must have their ass kicked so that those sancho panzas wiped the drivel off their gaping muzzles and would not cross the street to red.

The Tarzan-like roaring departed, who has achieved absolute freedom from the conventions of morality and behavior patterns of human species, will easily become their own in the family of brown bears, or in the lost link between the ape and human herds, but the present normal have no application for his qualities.

Yes, but why shall we need each other?
What could the normal have to do with the absolutely free?

Let’s don’t forget the mobility and overlapping of the categories, before reaching the absolute the departed had been start-ups within the lower leagues.
Besides, some of the normal (or else exceptionally gifted pretenders) could still harbor hope for a return of the departed ones out of the rough. 

‘Shine! Shine on!
You, crazy diamond!’

Don’t get scared, partner! They can’t catch up!
They cannot climb up to the shining peaks of your absolute freedom…

What category am I personally from?
By the method of excluding the superfluous, I irrefutably find myself not all there.
After all, no normal one would allow themselves the luxury of a hearty laugh when all alone and there is no ‘Comedy Club’ on the TV.

Besides, I hear voices in my dreams, I will not hide.
I sleep, and they read to me—in such a detached tone—pieces of prose.
Well-built passages of decent enough prose, which I will never write, looking like a screenplay for a Hollywood movie.
The voice gets replaced with visual illustrations, and when there is a change in the storyline, it starts to mumble again. 
I don’t like these voices, they interfere with sleep, but I don’t know how to turn them off.

Belonging to the departed is excluded because of my disgust for impurities; physical and other.

Well, I do not have the IQ to place myself among the geniuses.
I have not been tested but I know for sure it won’t be enough for the category.

In the course of life, you naturally have to zip in any of the categories because each of us is just a drop in the streams of the current formation.
Sometimes the current gives me over to a stream to drag along the rapids, then happens I’m kicking back in the languid backwaters.
That’s what about my letter, actually, is, to which (and for a long time already) it’s time to come back…)

Everything returns to normal and in forty-five days I returned to our team.
Two months later, the buttock also returned to their normal form.
Body is fluid.

It's only that walking along the Settlement streets, where, in the dusty potholes of the future pools, there lay piles of fallen apples taken out with pails from the gardens and dumped in the road, I got wistful that somehow everything rolled on without me. 

‘So the summer past,
As if it had never happened...' 

At 13 Decemberists appeared Guena, the husband of my sister Natasha.

He was a representative of a well-to-do layer in the population.
His mother, Natalya Savelyevna, with her face and blue eyes was like a movie star from the Mosfilm, but she worked in the Station restaurant, from where she returned every evening with bags of food.

Her husband, Anatoly Efymovich, had already retired, kept shouting at everybody and swallowing his medicines – an unmistakable specimen of the managing stratum. 

The newlywed still did not get along with the husband’s parents, but there’s a time for everything.

Yes, I missed the wedding, but every cloud has a silver lining and Lenochka had gone all the way to ‘Artek’.
It turned out well despite the pessimistic forecast of Slaushevsky.
Besides, all came off so cheap, I did not pay a kopeck, the expenditures for recreational facilities in our country were traditionally met by trade unions.

Did Lenochka meet her mother Olga?
After all, Theodosia was also in the Crimea.
I do not know.
I never learned to ask the most elementary, simple questions...

The newlyweds returned to live with the Guena's parents and, as the wedding present, I built in their hutta yard the walls for garage and summer kitchen in one shed. 
Well, there were still partitions in the bathroom inside the hutta.
Just so trifles...

The mail brought for me to 13 Decemberists was put on the handmade shelves, next to the photograph of Eera. 
She stood in the summer stream during the pioneer practice near the town of Kozelsk, in the north of Chernigov region, in black sports pants rolled up above her knees and smiled from under the plastic visor of a light kerchief. 

My mail was the same thick magazine „Vsesvit“ brought once a month.
I opened it and, squinting, sniffed somewhere from the middle – I always liked the smell of fresh print ink.

However, this time there was nothing to smell, it was an envelope which I disliked at first sight.
It looked like having been ripped open with a kitchen knife and then, in fright, they glued it back pouring, just in case, twice as much glue as needed on top of everything. 
Here at once and clearly the hand of a layman was felt, a test of the pen of the younger generation. 

I opened the envelope from the side, but I still had to tear off a piece of paper stuck with glue, sacrificing pieces of typewritten text.

'What is it, Seryozha?' my mother asked anxiously. 
'Did Lenochka not tell you?' 
'No.' 
'She will then.' 

It was a summons to the local people's court over the lawsuit of a resident of Nezhin, the citizen Eera, to dissolve the marriage since the family, in fact, never existed and I was regularly taken to psychiatric hospitals diagnosed with schizophrenia... 

In the queue for the soon-to-be divorcees on the second floor of the people's court, I was the second, after a couple of local ample divorcees.
They looked like a pair of fluffed-up dove-pigeons, absolutely not talking to each other, and each one painstakingly looked the other way.

A girl, a little over the age of twenty, invited them to enter for the procedure.
For several minutes from behind the door, there was heard a dialogue of varying loudness but of the same illegibility.
Then the couple went out of the door, still not looking at each other, but already of blushy complexion, as if after a steam room in the bathhouse. 
One after another—the man first—they left...

In the room looking like a corridor, two tables formed the letter 'T'. 
The judge was in the center of the crossbar table with two lay judges – one for each side.
They were a thirty-year-old fair-haired man of a military uprightness and a woman over her forties who had let go all of it at all. 
The girl-clerk was sitting at the second table where it adjoined the upper one. 

I liked the judge at once – a handsome man about thirty-five and he looked like judges from Westerns. 
His jacket was off and he even opened a pair of top buttons on his waistcoat – an embodiment of Western democracy.

I decided to play along with him and, sitting on a chair a meter from the bottom table assumed the air of a kicking back cowboy – the left leg stretched out with its heel against the floor, and the right heel resting over the left foot.

'Get seated as you should! Don't get it where you are?' barked the fair-haired.
'If you demonstrate how to sit at attention, I'll be happy to ape you, comrade lance-corpo..' 
'Well, okay!' intervened the judge. 'Let him sit as he likes.'

Then he read up the lawsuit of the citizen of Eera about the absence of a family and my diagnosis.
He finished and addressed me:
'What can you say in this respect?'

'My wife is always right. Each word of hers is the holy, purest truth.'
The girl-clerk wrote down that not only the Ceaser's wife could be beyond any suspicion. 

The judge used his home-made trump with which he apparently had started up and pumped the previous pair of divorcees: 
'But was there not anything really good in your marriage?'
'Why not? We were the sexiest lovers of the institute.'
With a sidelong glance at the innocent blush of the girl-clerk, the judge announced that was enough and the court needn't any more evidence.

Thus was dissolved my wedlock with Eera.





