~~~ Defying the Wash ~~~ 

The landlady liked to quote her deceased spouse and often boozed with her veteran friends, not in the kitchen, because of the tenant, but behind the curtains in her room doorway. 
I was sitting in my room and did not intervene with anything – you can’t forbid them living their life in a style.

My connection with 13 Decemberists was not broken up completely. 
I had asked my father to manufacture at RepBase some spare parts to assemble a wardrobe in my room.
He produced a prop and two thin tubes by my drawing; my mother sewed the needed piece of burlap and it turned out a fabric-walled wardrobe in the corner, as it was once in the hallway on the Object.
However, since then the advanced technologies paced far ahead, I covered it with a light thick foam plate of those used for heat isolation finishing of the railway cars at the KaPeVeRrZe Plant.

My room seemed too squalid for a safe house and no conspirators showed up.
I started to consider it a monk-hermitage cell and I liked its look, especially the black and white bark of the birch walling the window; sometimes, tired of translations, I just sat and looked at it.

When I settled down, my mother came to a visit escorted by my father.
In the kitchen, my former and my current landladies measured each other with irreconcilable glances and exchanged official nods.
Then my parents stood sighing under the bare bulb hanging from the ceiling on its dust-blackened wire.
To all their questions I was giving polite, though monosyllabic answers and they left because the one and only chair in the room was not stimulating longer stay.

At the beginning of autumn, in the middle of the week, Eera came from Nezhin. 
She found our construction site in the At-Seven-Winds, I changed in the trailer and we went to the city.
I always liked her romantically wide cloak below the knees.

We went to visit Lyalka.
His wife, Valentina, was relieved to learn that by us everything was fine.

A couple of times, when I and Eera had a quarrel, she used to come then to Konotop and ask Valentina to call me from the Settlement.
The Decemberists street was a long way from the Peace Square.
And so, with Valentina’s mediation, Eera and I were reconciling on the sofa covered with a hard carpet in the living room of Valentina and Lyalka’s place.

Actually, you could hardly call them ‘quarrels’, it’s just that sometimes Eera was in the mood for yelling.
Because of I was so ugly to look at.
That was after we went out to watch some sort of a comedy with a gay tinge by the Mosfilm.
Or that no one would ever be interested in those translations of mine...

But real quarreling between us did not work.
Despite my tongue-tiedness, I somehow managed to convince her that such yells were not a role for us, why to repeat other people's clues? 
It sounds so stupidly, but I myself understood what I meant but could not express.

It happened only once that I misbehaved.
That time I brought my payment from the SMP-615 and put it on the table under the pier-mirror.
Eera asked how much was there and then started yelling that was not money.
She did not need such alms!
Then I grabbed that skinny pile and tore it in two before throwing out of the window.

While Eera was away out in the yard I did not know what to do and only was cursing my lack of restraint. 
In my next visit Eera somewhat shyly explained that the bank could accept glued bills.

(...and that's correct because banks also need money and 70 rubles are not scattered in your path, except when you are going under a window on the first floor, but even then in a torn condition…) 

What I was personally surprised with during that particular development, it's the poor quality of paper used for printing money. 
Say, if you cut some funny money of newspaper—the same number of bills—it would be harder to tear it up that my payment.
It literally went in two of its own will in my hands…

Then we visited the new Culture House of KaPeVeRrZe Plant built next to the Bazaar.
They say the construction cost amounted to six million rubles.
The Loony director, Bohmstein, moved over there to the same position.
There was a ballroom with a bar on the second floor.

When we came to my apartment, Praskovya was just driving out her orgy of alcoholic widows in the neighborhood.
I introduced her and Eera to each other in the kitchen.

The landlady carefully examined her and, in my opinion, she also like Eera’s raincoat.
She even kissed her suddenly and then me too, on the spur of the moment, and went to sleep behind her curtains.
Eera even made a small grimace of misunderstanding, however, did not dare to resist, as for me, I did not care at all.

One time Eera and I were going by a local train and some gay from the opposite seat started to make overtures to me.
Eera simply flew in a temper.
She even started bickering with him.
But it’s just funny because I’m indifferent to them.
Sasha Chalov’s daddy was kissing me on the cheek, and now it’s tipsy Praskovya.
Who cares?

But in my entire life I have never felt a more sweet, lustfully tender and, at the same time, so eagerly clinging and tight-fitting vagina than that night; even with Eera, I had that for the first and last time. 
What became the decisive factor?
The interior of a monastery cell, or the double kiss from Praskovya Khvost?

(...there is still a whole lot of questions that I won’t find answers to. 
Never…)

Later in the autumn, I was sent to work in the Vorozhba station, where the construction of the three-story Communication House was underway. 
The walls and the roof were already in place and my responsibility was laying the partitions.
There I once again got a proof that the body of a human being is much smarter than he himself.

At both ends of the building, there were inside staircases, one of them completed and the other not yet. 
I was going upstairs for the first time and did not know that between the second and third floors the steps had not yet been laid.
Only the pair of channels for eventual placing steps was rising to the landing between the two floors.
I was lazy and decided to climb up the channel by the wall, its width of 10 cm seemed enough.
I turned sideways and, facing the wall made a couple of careful steps upward.

Then I discovered my mistake – the channel was placed too close to the wall and my center of gravity coincided with its face, deflecting from that vertical would, according to the laws of physics, send my body into a dive with the free fall acceleration onto the debris with insertions of crookedly sticking rebars deep in the basement. 
However, after the start I could not make the same two steps back, there was not room enough to turn even my face back, so high was located the center of gravity.
I clung to the red brick wall as if to something most dear to me and watched an unforgettable picture.

My hands turned into tiny octopuses.
Each finger lived its own life bending in all direction in the search for clefts between the bricks. 
With my hands enrooted in the wall, I pulled myself upward and then gently dragged my feet up the inclined channel. 

After many a repetition of that trick, we got out. 
But I’m still sure if the seams in the brick courses were filled properly with the mortar but not in the style of ‘off we drive!’ no unknown reserves of the human body would save me.
From the ensuing surge of adrenaline, I realized why cliffhangers love mountains so much, but I personally would not risk it.

In that winter they excavated all of the Professions street.
The rumors had it as if that was done for laying the sewer, but it looked like a long foundation pit for about a kilometer and four-five meters deep. 
In places, the dug canyon was crossed with a thick underground telephone cable that suddenly appeared hanging in the air across the pit, from one wall to the other. 
And deep down there a bulldozer was moving earth and the gravel brought by KAMAZes. 
Only along the concrete wall of the KaPeVeRrZe Plant there remained a meter-wide ledge with a path over all those hillocks of the piled soil. 

And I was walking along that trail with a plastic bag in my hand – up and down, up and down.
When I saw a schoolgirl ahead going in the same direction, then from the yellow and gray tartan of her coat I realized I should not go on. 
That was not my way.
Fortunately, the telephone cable was sagging nearby towards the opposite wall of the pit.
I stepped on it and went on without slowing down my pace.
I did not even mind there was the bag in my hand.
But after I passed a couple of meters the usual story happened again.
I started to doubt – was I really a tightrope walker to pace the cables?

(...because of the like doubting Simon, aka Stone, aka Peter, instead of having a leisurely walk over the water started to go down into it…) 

The cable fluttered and began to sway increasing the amplitude.
I waved my arms and fell down.

It's a good news that flying past, I managed to grab onto the cable with my hands. 
After pausing for a couple of seconds, I let go and, like a parachutist, jumped to the bottom of the pit.
There, I leaned over the face of a prostrate prostitute in a broad-brimmed hat with red lining.
She stared up past me.
How come the prostitute in the snow?
Why was I there?

It’s a pot shot about the prostitute, she fell out of the bag in the fall.
And it was right for me to be there – my way was finished on that cable, another one was starting from that depth…

And I went along the bottom of the pit to the far end of it with the ramp for KAMAZ truck to drive down and from there to the station square to be in time for our ‘seagull’ and go to work and in the end of the day to get off the ‘seagull’ by the bus station and buy a ticket and run, waving it, into the already starting bus:
‘I have a ticket! I have a ticket!’
Because Eera told me about her country trip to the Hare Pines to keep her fidelity to me despite the champagne in the glove box.
Because of what else did I have to do?
That’s why I went to Romny...

It was completely dark and cold in Romny, but I found a hotel.
The receptionist did not know where to accommodate a guest with a plastic bag in his hand, so she allotted me a four-bed room alone.
Although she could join me to that pair of business travelers that came from the same bus after me.

The room was a usual pencil-box for four, empty and freshly painted over the paint coats from the previous twenty renovations.
Four thick terry towels hung from the backs of the four beds and the radio on the wall was singing a thick bass romance about the cold morning, gray morning.
I had nothing to do.
I turned off the radio and the light.
I lay down and looked into the darkness until I fell asleep.

The morning, in contrary to the forecast from the romances, turned out to be sunny and bright and I quickly found the psychiatric hospital.
I left the plastic bag in a snowdrift on the lawn under a big tree and, without any luggage, entered the open gates keeping my hands visible. 

When the guards got it that I was not visited anyone but wanted to stay there myself, I was taken to a small office.

A young man who looked like a militia lieutenant, except for a white medical coat, asked about the reason for my coming.
‘I want a certificate that I am not crazy.’
I knew perfectly well that by those words I had burned down all the ships and blown up all the bridges behind me and now they would lock me up for sure.
‘And who says you were crazy?’
‘Well, in the tram, for instance.’

His animation grew exponentially.
He started inquiring what kind of a seal I wanted on the certificate – round, or triangle?
‘It does not matter as long as it’s signed.’
So he called a young doctor and an elderly nurse to take me to the shower and then to the fifth unit.

Before the shower, the nurse cut off the hair in my groin with a hairdresser’s hand-machine.
I felt embarrassed, but I did not resist – a strange monastery is not a place to declare your rules, as they say.

After the shower, the doctor took me to an interview.
In order to consolidate the success, I drove a couple of fools, she only moaned lustily while scribbling post-haste in a thick notebook. 

When we went out into the yard, I said that I had left a plastic bag outside the gates.
The nurse refused to believe, but then she went off and with amazement brought the bag.

(...and what was there to be surprised with?
Who’ll get the nerve to lift a bag left, like a bait, by the regional psychiatric hospital gate?..)

The doctor opened the bag and allowed me to keep it along with a copybook, a pen, and a book in English with a close-up of a woman in a hat on the cover.

The fifth unit of the Romny psychiatric hospital was located at the height of the third floor.
The construction was carried out by the blueprints of the Stalin times with the stair flights forming a stairwell.
Halfway up, there was an iron mesh across the well to surprise a suicide with a failure.

The stairs ended on the wide landing in front of the locked door with a pair of long wooden benches at the sides.

Behind the door, customarily, there started a corridor.
From a vertically grated window by the door with a tablet ‘Head Doctor', it went to the right to end, at a considerable distance, with a blind wall with a tap in it and a sink. 

In the long wall on either side of the corridor there gaped rectangular doorways to the wardrooms, which at first sight seemed caves due to the absence of doors. 
The light of the world outside reached the wardrooms through the window panes and the iron grates before finding its way to the corridor.
That’s why, in cloudy weather, the bulbs in the corridor were turned on.
They served rather emphasize than disperse the twilight. 

Halfway to the far-off end wall, one wardroom was missing, turned into a small hall with two barred windows.
In the corner next to the right window, a tall pier-mirror stood on top of its cabinet and in the returning to the corridor partition was a white door with the sign ‘manipulation room’.
The left window was blocked by a tall box with a turned off TV on it and a hospital couch under, put along the corridoripetal partition with another white door in the hall signed ‘senior nurse’.

The floor of the corridor was paved with middle-sized ceramic tiles of a brownish dark hue not violating the general gamma of the all-embracing twilight.
The floor gleamed moistly since the privileged patients washed it twice a day with wet cloths on wooden mops.

To check how dangerous I was, they placed me at first to the observation wardroom, opposite the hall with the mirror.
In the corridor, by the jamb of the door-less doorway to the wardroom, there stood an armchair with brown leatherette covering its nickel-plated carcass over four slender pipes of the legs. 
It was seated with an elderly but sturdy mujik—a paramedic—in a white coat and a small white capulet. 

With one of his ears turned to the observation wardroom, he kept his face parallel to the corridor with its rare passers-by in dark pajamas and another paramedic at another wardroom in the distance sitting in exactly same chair, yakking idly with a young man in pajamas and boots squatted in front of him with his arms hanged over his knees.

The paramedic took me into the wardroom chinking on the way his bunch of keys against the back of the first from the doorway bed with a blonde-haired guy in bright red pajamas staring in the ceiling while energetically beating off under the sheet. 
Out of the opposite corner burst a dramatically satanic laughter just to cut off immediately.
The paramedic pointed at the third bed from the window and I humbly lay down.

Between me and the window there lay a young man with the shaven head, tightly wrapped in a blue hospital coat and peering at the ceiling.
Soon he turned to me an attentive look from the bluish circles under his eyes and asked whether my brother’s name was Sasha and I had a sister too.

Then he squeezed his head between his hands and started to tell me that he had been studying with them at the technical school before one evening his father sent him to collect cows when the gray fog was drifting through Podlypnoye and left a cold to his hatless head which hurt ever since. 

He shooed one or two halfwits off when they were approaching the back of my bed with illegibly formulated questions.
Then he said that his name was also Sasha, turned away and fell asleep.

The wardroom-mates started to exact from the blond-haired singing a song and he with whining shouted one of the fresh hits:

‘Save, please, save, please, save, please, save my broken heart,
Find, please, find, please, find, please, find, find her, find...’

Two hours later, making sure that I was not a violent case, the senior nurse called me from the corridor and led to Wardroom 9, closer to the office with the tablet ‘Head Doctor’.
The 9th looked more comfortable with its just five beds.
Only the white table in the corner by entrance partly obstructed the way, but since there was no door that was a minor inconvenience. 
Jungle shrieks from neighboring wardrooms soon also grew habitual sounds and ceased to stir the attention up.

In the evening, in the corridor sounded a cry ‘to the kitchen!’ and a group of privileged patients led by a nurse went to the exit.
Half an hour later they returned and with a harried pace, precipitated by the weight of two boiler-thermoses, marched in the contrary direction.
A few minutes later from the distant end of the corridor they called:
‘Workmen to dinner!’

They always first called workmen to the dining room.
Instead of pajamas, the workmen wore black spetzovkas and after the breakfast and lunch, they were marched away somewhere. 

When the workmen left the dining room, in the corridor sounded the next call:
‘The second party, to dinner!’
And, after the needed period of time, they shouted the concluding call:
‘The third party, to dinner!’

At the distant end of the corridor, there were three locked doors in the left wall: to the shower, the dispenser, and the dining room. 
Neither of them had a tablet, but everyone knew where was what.

In the shower room stood tin pails and wooden mops for the floor washing.
Its door was opened by a nurse or a paramedic for the privileged to take the instruments for their pastime and locked again.
However, despite so close control one of the fifth unit patients managed to hang himself in the shower room.
Not at the first attempt, though.

Before the fifth unit feeding, they opened the dispenser room, to place the brought boiler-thermoses, and the dining room, to have where to call the eating parties to. 

The dispenser room was narrowed by the large shelving along the wall opposite the dispenser window.
The robust shelves bore plastic bags with food delivered to the patients by their visitors on the visiting day.
Twice a week, they shouted in the corridor:
‘Delivery! Who has a delivery? To the dining room!’
Those who knew there was a delivery from their relatives stored in the dispenser room, that is things they did not manage to eat at the meeting, went to the dining room to finish eating.

If someone could not keep in mind or did not want to remember the existence of a plastic bag on the shelves, their attentive wardroom-mates would remind him and even lead to the dining room to help in eating the delivery. 

I did not belong to the workmen and ate with the second party.
We lined up in a noisy, diversely dressed but equally hungry queue along the wall by the door blocked with a paramedic’s figure, while they were sweeping off the tables inside after the previous eaters.
The paramedic also controlled that someone would not get in the line after having been fed with a previous party.

At last, the paramedic said:
‘Come on!’
And we noisily poured through the unusually narrow door into the dining room with three windows and long tables, like in a medieval refectory only covered with oilcloth.
They stood in three rows from wall to wall and a narrow passage in the middle divided them into six separate tables.
We sat at them, overstepping the benches nailed to the floor. 

Amid the animated noise and uninhibited gesticulations, we waited for the constant on-duty blond masturbant to bring the wide plywood tray with aluminum bowls, spoons and bread. 
Those who got the havvage started to eat it and the others watched them and waited on while the chmo dispenser, also a patient, was filling the next tray behind his window.
We ate everything up and began to wait for a tray of tin cups filled with sour-sweet kissel whose skin I so much hated when a kindergarten kid.

Once I overslept the feeding and had to eat with the third party.
Some grievous sight.
There, people treated their faces as plasticine kneading out of it anything.
But I found out who produced baboon shrieks that I heard from my wardroom, and who answered him with the roar of a wounded elephant.
There were no desultory conversations at the third party feeding.

And yet at times, someone from the second party would mix into the third one. 
Not just of pure love for living nature, they had time to eat the neighbor's ration while he was making faces to the window grates. 

Sasha, who knew my brother Sasha, was favoring the third party and often ate with them in order to curb those halfwit but cunning freeloaders. 

Those three meals were the noisiest time of day in the fifth unit. 
If someone started to make too much noise at an unreasonable hour, a pair of paramedics ran to his wardroom and, following a rectifying hit or two with their bunch of keys on his head, fixed the troublemaker. 
That is, they crucified him lying, with his wrists and ankles tied to the iron corners along his bed spring mesh by means of cloth straps, obviously from the former worn-out bed-sheets.

After feeding, everyone dispersed to their wardrooms or strolled aimlessly along the brown tiles of the corridor floor.
I would not say that we were starving there – a havvage as anywhere else.
Once for a dinner, we were even given a pair of pancakes each. 
Though being cold, they had been smeared with a drop of some jam.

And quite separately stands the incomprehensible late night feast when two laundry basins appeared in the hall filled with sausage of two types: liver-squash and blood-mixture; and everyone could take as much as he wanted.
Except for a pair of the third party members, who suddenly grew sane enough, but the fat patient in charge of the basins drove them away. 
Discrimination happens anywhere...

But the main delight in the life of the fifth unit was being brought by the stately, flax-haired nurse in a pillowcase though which angularly bunched pieces of refined sugar. 
She took that pillowcase to the ‘senior nurse’ office and every day, who had the brains to come and ask for, received a few pieces of not pressed but a real refined sugar.
I, for one, had rains to ask twice a day.

And I tried to consume that sugar unnoticed because who had not brains to turn to the original source were clever enough to ask it from me.
I tried to lie, as if it was over, but then remembered that it was a wrong-doing and shared the sugar from another pocket in my pajamas.

Once in twenty days a black-haired woman with a sharp nose and, naturally, in the white medical coat, came to the hall in the middle of the corridor.
You could see at once that she was from the glassy-eyed, but I had already kicked that off and therefore took the version of the fifth unit old-timers as if she was a former circus acrobat. 

The acrobat cut the stubble off our faces with a hairdresser machine, and for the haircut, she used scissors, if you did not ask to cut it also with the machine in ‘zero' style. 

The cultural life was catered to by the TV set.
One hour before and one hour after the news program ‘Time’ during which it was a break for the procedures.
Some ten watchers gathered around it dragging stools and chairs from their wardrooms.
The paramedic by the observation wardroom also moved nearer.

At night the wardrooms were lighted with the electric bulbs.
Probably, so that no one did something to himself or his neighbor.
Sleeping with the light on is inconvenient because even if in your dreams you are walking in the wild its inevitable presence is felt all the same.
The corridor though was not lighted so bright and paramedics could get a normal rest in their chairs.

In the small hours, wardroom 9 was visited by a young guy eager to show how dexterously he juggled a pair of boiled eggs from a delivery. 
Sometimes he showed a small sized but artistically executed picture where a stark naked male was concentratedly chasing a girl in boots and a high Russian fillet. 
Her long tight braid flapped on the run and she looked back in fright at the meter-long dick of the determined pursuer.
Apparently, a copy of the original of the first half of the XIX century. 

Then a frail man with elusive eyes came to take the young guy away.
According to his repeatedly shared story, he got to the psychiatric hospital after accidentally breaking the window panes in the hutta of the Village Council with a stick not omitting a single glass.

He kissed the youngster in his pate under the stubble hair, called him ‘mnemormysh’ and led him back to his wardroom.
He kissed all the young people in the pate and called them ‘mnemormysh'. 
I had never heard such a word before, but it sounded very tenderly, like ‘pinniped pup’.

The time for getting up was announced by paramedics jingling their key bunches against the bed backs so that by the arrival of the head doctor and the nurses the fifth unit life would flow in its orderly channel.
First of all, all flocked to the toilet.

2 TOILET BOWLS FOR 80 PEOPLE ARE TOO LITTLE!

2 toilet bowls for 80 people are too little, so the queuing to them started in the corridor and inside it continued along the walls of two rooms – the hallway and the actual toilet.

In the first of the rooms, I once fainted for the first time in my life. 
Absolutely for no reason whatsoever.
Dark entered my eyes and I crept with my back against the wall down to the floor and sat there in the darkness around me.
But I did not shut off completely and heard the echo of distant voices explaining to each other that it was just faint. 
Then the light returned, I opened my eyes and went back to the line.

For those who couldn’t any longer keep in check their excretory system, a tin basin with handles was put on the floor tiles in the center of the actual toilet room.
When it got filled up some of the nuts would shovel with his hands the excrement into a separate pail and empty it into one of the toilet bowls, the remaining urine was poured out in a drainpipe in the corner.
There was some undefined time quota for squatting on the bowl, when it was up the nearest queue started to grumble and in a minute some deaf-mute nuts from the end of the line would pull you off the toilet without explaining the reasons.

After the breakfast, the toilet was locked until the end of lunch when they opened it briefly for washing the floor. 
The last chance to use the toilet was the half an hour after the dinner because of the final floor washing of the day.

The diffuse way of my previous life did not allow me to train my bladder strict enough for fitting that concise schedule.
Sensing the urge to take a leak, I fell into a panic that I could not stand it until the next half an hour of the open toilet. 
Appealing to paramedics in whose possession was the coveted key did not make sense because of the unchanging answer:
‘Piss off! You can’t use the toilet, the floor there is washed.’
So to avoid a warming up, explanatory hit over the head with the whole key bunch you had to conform and piss off. 

One day, driven to despair, I tried to take a leak into the sink on the end wall of the corridor and got on the ribs from the patient who often smoked there on the sly admiring the sink, like a park fountain being on repair.

During another crisis, overcoming shame, I turned to an elderly nurse with keys on her belt, trying to delicately explain my need and plight.
She couldn't understand for a long time my muttering about what I felt within my bladder but then opened the door to the shower and pointing to the trap ordered:
‘Puddle here!’
No wonder they were named ‘sisters of mercy’ in the Tsarist army.

One time groups of patients were driven in turn to the bathhouse in another building. 
It was necessary to stand under the lukewarm shower in a slippery cast-iron bath with brown greens on its walls.
You soaped the washcloth left by the previous shower taker and next to the bath there stood another naked already but not wet as yet, twitching his cheek and jerking the neck and staring in nowhere under the low ceiling.
The small waffle towel got soaked before you managed to wipe yourself off and the residual moisture was absorbed with the underwear.

In the afternoon it was better not to come near the windows in the hall.
A pair of tower cranes were seen through the glass, turning slowly their beams at distant construction sites, and from the bus station, there could be heard unintelligible announcing of bus departures of indiscriminate destinations and wishes of a happy journey. 
The sun was shining, the snow melting. 
Life was going on and on over there but you were on this side of the vertical bars.

Saturday in the fifth unit was the day of visitors reception, they were not allowed on other days of the week.
When the doorbell rang in the corridor, the on-duty nurse looked who was there and shouted out along the corridor the name of a patient to go outside the door and see his visitors.

My parents came on the first Saturday.
I was very surprised because I had not told anyone anything when leaving to Romny.
It turned out that the next day my landlady informed them of my absence, they called the SMP-615 and were told where I got off the bus the day before.
At the bus station, someone also remembered seeing me and the tangle got unraveled. 

We met on the landing in front the door to the fifth unit, one of the long benches was vacant.
Along that, we sat in a row. 
My mother, pushing her warm kerchief back from the head onto her shoulders, said:
‘How is it, sonny?’ and she began to cry,
My father, in order to calm and console her, said:
“Well, started! Started again!’

He did not take off his fur hat and did not cry but looked at the bench opposite, where another pair of parents fed all the goodies from their plastic bag to their patient – a crazy guy who did not talk at all because he had been bitten by an encephalitic tick. 

I also was eating.
My mother had brought all sorts of homemade cakes and buns, and Eclair cakes with custard filling from the cooking shop by the Under-Overpass.
She knew what I loved.

There was also lard in the plastic bag to take it with me, but I flatly refused.
So at the end of the meeting, my mother handed the bag to the nurse to store it in the dispenser room. 
But I did not go to the dining room when they called to come and eat the deliveries.
For the principle’s sake.

On the following Saturday, my brother and sister came instead of our parents. 
My brother had no hat on his head but he frowned just like our father and told me:
‘What for, Sehryoga? It’s no good you do it.’
And Natasha did not cry but kept reproving me:
‘Tell me just one thing – you really need it? Well done, good fellow!’

She said that Eera did not come although she called her so that she knew.
Eera never came to Romny either but I understood that she had to look after the baby.

On March 8 they brought a gurney to the corridor with a pile of free postcards for the holiday.
I filled one to Nezhin with congratulations and love for Eera.
While writing I was horrified how ugly and trembling were the lines in the postcard and the handwriting was not mine at all. 
Probably, because of injections.

The head doctor of the fifth unit did not start talks about music, she treated me.
I was injected with iminazine intramuscularly three times a day. 

The first days it still could be tolerated but then there was no intact spot left on the buttocks.
One shot got upon another, nodules sprang up over my ass that turned into a terrain of tightly swollen knolls and it became difficult to just walk along the corridor, leaving aside any orbiting.
The skin there too had no time for regeneration and started not very profuse but constant bleeding that stained the hospital underpants. 

The most unbearable was the final, third injection of a day.
It was shot at nine in the evening and at the sound of the tinkling of the metal boxes with syringes on the gurney pulled along the corridor, my teeth clenched like in a spasm. 
The gurney gradually reached our wardroom and the on-duty nurse appeared in the doorway with a syringe in her hand.
Having done an injection she returned to the corridor after another syringe for the next patient.

Once a nurse missed me and I pretended to be asleep so as not to remind her and when I heard the gurney tinkling along to wardroom 8 I could not believe my own luck.
An hour later the nurse called me by name from the doorway, she held a syringe in her hand and smiled victoriously:
‘Thought it’s over, Ogoltsoff?’

In the manipulation room, before they go around, those syringes were charged according to the list, when one remained unused on the gurney, she realized that someone had been missed.
You remembered – well done, but why smile?
At that moment she reminded me of Sveta from my polygamous past.
Probably, by her hairstyle...

I was also injected with insulin intravenously, but at first, the head doctor warned my parents to agree. 
Beltyukov, a young but experienced neighbor in the wardroom, told that they extract insulin from bull’s liver, there was nowhere else to get it from.
The purpose of these injections was to bring a patient into a coma. 
Many were cured that way, subtracting the percentage on whom the drug worked incorrectly.
But the percentage of survivors was higher.
The main trick was to pull the patient out of a coma in time. 

Shots of insulin were done to me and Beltyukov in the morning.
One insertion in a vein inside the arm elbow.
Then the nurse called the nearest paramedic and he came with volunteers from the patients to fix us with rags to the iron beds we were lying on.
They fixed only our arms but firmly so that we could not wring them away when led out of the coma back.
After about twenty minutes the nurse would return to the wardroom to fill out some ledger sitting at the white desk in the corner.
That’s why it was placed in that improper place – she was watching us like milk on fire so that it would not boil over.

Beltyukov and I lay on our beds, side by side, and talked looking into the ceiling. 
He was a sociable guy and looked like Vitalik from the construction battalion, or maybe not very much so.

Then our conversation turned into incoherent exclamations: Beltyukov talked about the dominance of fucking matriarchy and I declared that all people were brothers and how could you possibly not see it?

At the same time, my head was tilting back to see my backbone but the pillow was in the way. 
It was the signal for the nurse to put aside her ledger and give us a shot of glucose intravenously to ward off the upcoming coma. 
Then they untied us and gave a glass of water with a thick solution of sugar because the mouth burned very hot.

That does not mean that Beltyukov and I always shouted the same thing, it was just the core theme of our uncontrolled slogan chanting when under insulin.
On Sundays, we were not injected with that shit. 

The hardest to survive from was a shot of sulfur.
In fact, it is injected to drunks in the form of punishment but, perhaps, the head doctor had special experimental considerations, or maybe hopes.
She wanted to do her best.

It’s also a shot in the buttock, but the effects are spreading deep and down in the bone tissue.
Two days following the injection the treated has to drag his leg because of pain as if your join was finely smashed.

The shot of sulfur broke my will.
Dragging my leg, I came to the dining room to eat the lard from the delivery, but when the chmo dispenser patient handed me the bag, the smell inside was like that in my school briefcase in the fourth grade, when I forgot to eat the ham sandwich and it spent there all winter vacations.
I had to throw the lard away.

My relations with the fellow patients were even and correct – I still remained a renegade.
Those wrenched completely beyond any reach did not, naturally, notice me and who understood, as far as possible, showed certain respect because of sympathy and pity because of that they were injecting me with insulin.

Only one young guy, Podrez, for some time was fawning over me without any reason and one day in the queue to the dining room he hit me in the stomach, I couldn’t guess why.

Two minutes later, Beltyukov, in the same queue, found some fault with Podrez, pinioned him and kept immobilized.
He did not say me anything, not even with his look, but there was no need for hinting that he had fixed Podrez for me to jab the guy into an area of my choice.
But I did not hit, I felt sorry for the mentally ill, though my stomach hurt.

Much more crushing blow for me was the loss of the book in English.
On the white desk in our wardroom there remained only the copybook with the already finished translation.
I was very upset because the book was borrowed from Zhomnir, who borrowed it from another teacher at Department of English – the smiling Nona. 
But when I, in that terrified state, turned to the head doctor, she, with indefinite indifference responded that the book would not go anywhere.
And she was right.

Three days later it was returned to me by a patient who collected it from a half-nuts kidnapper from wardroom 7. 
He could not conceal it any longer.

(...I understand the thief’s sentiment.
At those times they did not know in the Soviet Union how to produce such glossy paperbacks for books and, all of a sudden—wow!—a bright close-up of a woman face against the background of the fifth unit.
Who would resist?..)

He did not crush it in any way, only on the backside of the cover he poured out his adoration with light touches of a pencil. 
Slightly reminiscent of a sketch of the cerebral cortex.
Or gentle curls of smoke.
Or maybe that was the formulas of some scientific language from a beyond the future…
Only I had already given up going down that road.

The patients were all very different.
By someone you could see at once there was a shift of conscience, but looking at another you would not say he's nuts.
In general, there were all kinds of sorts.

There were sociable ones, like the brunette fat man.
Yet one day, lying on the couch in the hall he confessed to me his murder of someone else.
And, usually so very cheerful, he grew at once all gloomy.
Maybe he lied because the murderers were kept at the second unit whose paramedics were some complete brute beasts.

There were arrogant liars.
One of them, with a fat tattoo of ‘Kolya' on his hand, started to convince me that his name was Peter, and then he evidently got offended although I had expressed no doubts. 

Tsyba amazed me with his erudition, he started to enumerate the unsuccessful suicide attempts of Hemingway until he realized that the pistol was most reliable.
And before that, I counted him among halfwits. 

One, seemingly normal, was very hurt when he heard that we all lived in a madhouse.
Always.
For life.
The madhouse was inside where we were, and outside too.
‘Do not say that at least here it's a mental hospital.' 
Such a delicate soul.

Or, say, that mujik whom I for a long period considered dumb.
On the contrary, he was very inquisitive it’s just that he prepared his questions all too carefully.
It took him a month before he approached me and, eye to eye, asked about the most painful:
‘And your wife was chaste?’
First, such words were not from the lexicon of dumbs, and secondly, I hadn’t checked her ears, quoting
Rabentus.
And the dumb, on hearing that, began to cry.
He fell silent again and the tears were dripping.

A rather gloomy madhouse on the whole.

However crazy, the patients knew everything and four days beforehand they warned me that on Friday I would be called to the commission where they decide to set me free or go on with treating.

The commission consisted of the head physician of the psychiatric hospital, the head doctor of the fifth unit and the on-duty nurse.
I was very afraid of saying something wrong and hastily agreed to anyone of them in anything they said:
‘Yes, yes, of course, yes!’
The head doctor said that I would be prepared for discharge but released only when some of my relatives would come to take me away.

How afraid I was that no one would come on Saturday!
After all, there had been such a Saturday when I waited in vain.
The whole evening I restrained myself not to burst into tears.
Sobs literally clenched my throat – I would not stand another week of injections...

My parents came together and we were summoned to the office of the head doctor.
She said that my treatment should be continued with iminazine pills.

My mother thanked her very much and my father took out money from his jacket pocket and handed it to my mother.
She came up to the head doctor and put the money into the pocket of her white medical coat, but she did not even notice it.

(...as it turned out later, the amount was forty rubles – the combined daily earnings of a team of six bricklayers.
That day there were three discharges, so the head doctor earned my monthly payment in one morning.
As they say in Konotop, it depends on what you've been educated for…)

On the bus from Romny to Konotop, my mother cautiously informed me that my things were moved from the apartment under the great birch back to 13 Decemberists. 
I was saddened by that news but I had not strength to resist…

At first, our team met me with caution, as a person who returned from Romny.
However, at the construction site, such attitude is quickly straightened out. 
If by the end of a working day you haven’t surprised anybody with your shovel over their head neither taken a dive from the fifth floor then you’re like everyone else.

True, Lyda noticed that I leaned against the pallet with bricks and dozed off in the sun before the crane brought up the mortar, which had never happened with me.
And Gregory commented to Grinya that I was not the same and pointed at the spanner I laid over the niche for the electric meters on the landing – one edge five centimeters higher than the other.
Grinya answered that they would eat it up all the same because the niche would not be visible behind the frame of the box for the meters.
I had to put the spanner to rights during the midday break, but earlier I wouldn’t have allowed myself such sloppily poor job.

Well, in general, I had become more compliant. 
The only thing that the treatment couldn’t straighten out was my refusal to fall on four bones when laying from the bridging slabs the wall on which they rest.
All did it on all four, it’s more convenient that way and safer too.
I still was squatting when laying the brick course on the lower level. 
Vita also at times refrained from kneeling.

(...it’s sometimes hard to get rid of a young pioneer inside you.
‘Better to dive from the fourth-floor height than lay the wall standing on your knees!'…) 

When I went to Nezhin for a weekend, I took pains to keep my eyes a little squinted, otherwise, people felt creepy at my sight – my lower eyelids drooped as if I'd been forced to watch a documentary series about the death camps, gas chambers, and grim crematoria. 
In the stoker-house of the construction battalion, I read a long article about Clockwork Orange in ‘Moscow' magazine where they applied the same technique to him. 

Then I noticed that a second chin began to form below my jaw and threw the glass container with iminazine pills (given by the fifth unit head doctor) into the drain pit in the garden of 13 Decemberists. 
My mother noticed it and threatened that she would report to psychiatrist Tarasenko about my violation of instructions from Romny.
‘Mom, how can’t you see? The pills are to make me crazy.’
I was always proud of my leanness and did not want to lose it notwithstanding its slight stoop.

Everything became as before.
Or nearly so.
The construction site. Nezhin.
The eyelids returned to their place and no need to strain the eye muscles.
The translations. 
The poems...

The poems started to emerge with the beginning of my construction worker career in the SMP-615.
They were not poems at first, but pieces of unconnected phrases.
Some seemed attractive by alteration of sounds in them, others by inherent ambiguity or rather their being double-barreled so that they could be interpreted in different ways.

In course of the labor process, I, secretly from fellow bricklayers, turned and revolved the pieces, recollected them, threw them out of my head to dogs, or devils, or scrap fucks, but the most persistent returned again.
Then there remained the last remedy – to stick them with a pen down to paper and forget.

(...in six years there gathered about 30 pieces of those uninvited stubborn rascals in two languages because each one was coming the way it fancied.
Among them were purely graphic ones painted from the surrounding landscapes like ‘the apple of the sky skewered on the sword of a beam...’;
or those marked by their onomatopoeic stickiness ‘Carkalomna barcarole'; 
or philosophical pieces like that about devoured God; 
and simply rhythmic-marching chants ‘what do we laugh at?.'...)

One of the first pieces I showed to Eera and she cocked up at once – who was that Madonna in padded workman jacket? 
As if I could know, just one of those queuing in the working canteen at the midday break.

As for ‘To the Tune of V.Kosma’ she did not ask anything, it was about her undoubtedly and clear.
Later she said that they told her it was a good poem and I stopped showing her anything.
Probably, out of jealousy caused by the unidentified someone to whom she gave it for evaluation.

When I read to my brother Sasha ‘The Scythian Interview’, his reaction was instantaneous:
‘You’re to be ratted on!’

(...if your poetry piece turns folk’s train of thoughts in KGB direction, it contains a worthy idea…)

Ivan, a carpenter from the SMP-615, somehow liked the line about a cabbage leaf on the edge of a knife.
After six months he asked to recite to him on cabbage once again. 
I do not know what could he find about it at all.

At times, when at the end of a midday break there were still five minutes before leaving the trailer to go on with laying the walls, the women of our team asked to read something new and Grinya shouted after the piece:
‘Sehryoga! They do not shoe horses with fire, there are horseshoes for that! Gelding ungroomed, that’s what you are!’
He was brought up and educated in the village of Krasnoye on the Baturin highway and should know such things better.

When the poems number exceeded a score my attitude to them changed qualitatively.
Why should they lay around?
Ain’t it a pity?
And I started to send them to the editorial offices of diverse magazines and book publishers.
Like Martin Eden from the nicknamed novel by Jack London.
And they were returning back to me, exactly as his to him, only with typewritten responses.

The responses looked like one and the same carbon copied answer.
That what I had sent was inconsistent with the thematic direction of their publication the editorial portfolio of which was filled for three years ahead, and not a single word about the verses themselves.
So Grinya’s review remained unsurpassed:
‘Gelding ungroomed!’

However, the literary collaborator at one of the journals shared, that a similar style was in the vogue in the 1930s. 
Probably, his aim was to point out the deprecated nature of the stuff, but made me happy instead – my poems had style! 

(...and what a style it was!
In the 30s' the Union of Writers had not been gelded yet with political purges and spy-hunting repressions. 
In those days people still wrote poetry and not conjuncture prone materials for the upcoming Party Congresses…) 

I gradually began to realize that guys whose trough was literary collaboration had no more interest in all those poetic ‘swords in the sky’ than in real-life skewers in their personal ass.

The final eye-opener became the response from ‘Moscow’ magazine to ‘Tired Alla’.
It was immediately evident that the literary collaborator showed a serious and thoughtful approach when considering the poem received.
One of the words in it turned out to be unknown to him and he took pains to check in with a dictionary.
He forgot to erase his pencil notes in my verse.
The word ‘craving’ remained underlined and its interpretation—‘lust’—was added nearby.
I do not know in which dictionary he found it, but it offended me.
The finishing blow was the name of the reviewer under his response – Pushkin!
A picture of Pushkin looking up ‘craving’ in a dictionary made me draw the line under fucking the editors’ brains with my stupid simplicity.
I realized that I was not a Martin Eden and it was anything but America around...

The discovery of my non-America whereabouts cut postal expenses for envelopes and registered letters.
Though sending such a letter was about fifty kopecks, the equivalent of two ‘Belomor-Canal' cigarette packs. 
The cost of living in the Soviet Union was quite reasonable and treatment of illusions, in fact, free of charge. 

In the summer you again visited Konotop, but, naturally, without any carriage.

Our team was working on the 50-apartment block near the Under-Overpass and one of the riggers, Katerina, shouted from the ground that I had visitors. 
I went downstairs and outside the gate to the sidewalk.

You stood next to Eera.
She was wearing a red sarafan with white Mongolian patterns.
I don’t remember what you had on, but I remember how cool you were smiling.

I gently lowered my plastic helmet onto your blond straight hair and it slipped right to your nose but could not put out your happy smile.
I remember that smile from under my helmet.

In a minute you both went on down the sidewalk and I watched after you, and the riggers, Katerina and Vera Sharapova, they also watched from behind the gate, suddenly silent and thoughtful because such beauty was going away – a woman in red hand in hand with a child with blond straight hair.

You had just turned three years old and I decided that the best gift for you would be a familiar face among the strangers at 13 Decemberists.
I went to Nezhin and, despite my tongue-tiedness, managed to convince Tonya to let her son go with me to your birthday in Konotop, provided that my father-in-law would arrive the following day and take him back.
Tonya was a really brave woman, she was not afraid of my reputation, finally drenched after Romny.

The local train was overcrowded and we had to stand in the aisle up to Bakhmach.
But how happy were you and Igor when we came to 13 Decemberists.
So much squealing!. 

And the next week I was on my vacation and four of us—you, Eera, I and Lenochka—went to the Seim.
My parents took a permit for us to the recreation camp of the RepBase.

It was a wide grounds bordered by a low plank fence where between large pines stood wooden huts with four beds in each and windows on all sides, like a veranda. 

When we first went to the river beach everybody got just stupefied, they never saw a Greek goddess go, moreover with such snow-white skin as Eera’s.

Another day we the four of us went hunting mushrooms in the forest plantation near Taransky Khutor village. 
Halfway there we met a pair of horses, but I worried for only Eera, she always was afraid of those animals.

The forest planting was of young pines standing in parallel rows.
Long spider webs stretching between the lined trees made the plantation almost impassable, but there were suillus in the fallen pine needles.
We were combing through the corridors formed with the pine trunks: there and back.

You grew thirsty and I asked Lenochka to take you to the camp—the path was wide and about just three hundred meters—because I wanted Eera all too madly.
You did not agree for a long time, but finally went on, and a minute later at the end of the pine corridor your crying rang out and Lenochka explained that you did not listen to her at all, although there were no horses anymore. 

In the evening there was heavy rain with a thunderstorm, but you were not afraid and only laughed because I was laying on my bed and you were stomping on my stomach. 
Someone's joy might hurt another one – in your three years you were a weighty kid, but Eera cried out to be patient with my own child.
I tolerated a little more and then I could hardly persuade you that it’s enough already.
It was a good summer...

On the day of your departure, you were again sorting it out with the linen rope stretched from the gate to the porch which really was not a right place for it.
You took a mop and started to knock it on the half-dried laundry along the rope.

My mother yelled at you and darkened with her face, but you already were too big to lose your footing and only the mop was taken from you.

We had to go to the tram terminal on foot, but Lenochka volunteered to take you there on the trunk of her bicycle.
Eera agreed though I was against the idea.
My misgivings increased when I noticed the glances exchanged between my mother and Lenochka.
The most frightening was that they did not look at each other, but into the ground at each other’s feet.
And there was a silent dialogue between their averted eyes:
‘Sure?’
‘Yes, do it!’

I do not invent, neither distort reality with fantasies and that could be proved with what happened next.
Yes, the dialogue which I could not hear but was aware of by means of I don’t know what really took place before the following events.

You left sitting on the trunk behind Lenochka.
My mother and Eera for a whole minute were ping-ponging empty phrases.
Eera and I went out into the street.
With the bags in my hands, I hurried along leaving Eera behind.
Before reaching the corner, some two hundred meters ahead, I knew that I was right in being rash when I heard your scream.

You stood by the fence and screamed.
Lenochka, holding her bicycle, tried to persuade you not to cry, but you did not listen to her and screamed on and on. 
The rusty iron pipe stuck up from under the ground between you two.
The only iron pipe by all the fences along the half-kilometer stretch between 13 Decemberists and the tram 3 terminal.

Everything fell into place. 
I got it all.
Very gently, so as not to show that I was aware, I asked Lenochka to go home; no need to see us off any further.

Then Eera came up too and started to comfort you, but you cried all the way to the terminal because of such a big bump on your forehead.

We silently drove in the tram.
Eera, dissatisfied with something was looking blankly out the window. 
You sat sullenly in her lap, and I, in the opposite seat, was fully devastated. 

How to live in a world where a grandmother blesses her granddaughter to kill another granddaughter of hers – this beautiful kid with 5 kopecks coin pressed by her mother to her forehead for the bump to dissolve?

Eera was silent on the train too and I did not even try to share what shouldn't be shared... 

(...now Lenochka has two children, beautiful daughters.
 You and she are strangers to each other and no one of you remembers anything.
Especially that pipe.
People are blessed with the gift of forgetting bad things.

My mother eventually became a witness of Jehovah and had collected piles of glossy eye-candy booklets for the saved or those who want to be saved. 

And it’s my fault that all that happened, but, upon my word of honor, in that recreation camp I wouldn’t stand Lenochka on my stomach – she was already nine years old…)

When I returned to work, the pavement before the 50-apartment block was cut with a transverse trench for the tie-in to the main communications under the Peace Avenue road. 
However, carpenters of the SMP-615 assembled a boarding bridge over the trench with beam railings for the convenience of the pedestrians. 

I was at the trench bottom working with the shovel when I saw Beltyukov on that bridge.
He was dressed in a polished colonial style.
I did not want to attract his attention, but he recognized me from up there, despite my spetzovka and helmet, stopped on the bridge to greet me and introduced to his mother, a lady in an aggressive neckline.

Then they went on.
He was nervous and she guarded him closely, and I understood the roots of his bitterness at matriarchy when he was being under insulin.

I also thought that our meeting in Romny was not his final stay in a mental hospital because he was strolling up there, defenseless.
Learn from me, sonny, down here in the trench, in my helmet, no bastards would reach me.
As for my stay in the madhouse, I went there as a volunteer and got fed up to the utmost, made wiser through my busted ass...

Accepting another of my translations, Zhomnir, in return,  warmed me up with a thick hardback book.
A monograph about schizophrenia.
He bought it when his daughter had problems with it; before she got married.

Monograph means a collection of articles by different authors whose works are dedicated to one common theme.
I thoroughly studied the friendly shared volume.
After all, that was not boiled sausage with added charms to win my love.

(...the authors consider different aspects the title subject from diverse standpoints according to their respective specializations.

One writer presents the comparison of the biochemical blood composition in some notorious schizophrenics at the peak of their spiritual activity to the periods of relative calm in the same person.
Unfortunately, the level of amino acids in leukocytes snows no sign of exacerbation.

Another contributor scrupulously measures anything which turns up to their measuring devices with the equally disappointing indefinite result. 

The third one just takes a seat next to the bed with a fixed up patient and, while the aberrating fictionalist drives him a fool, he writes down some really fabulous stuff.
Like, as he was going by trolleybus 47 being careful not to touch anyone and all the same there suddenly was a desert all around him and just a worn-out rag on his loins, and he was in a pack of similarly skinny, naked, sunburned guys like him when a band of horsemen galloped from behind a sandy hillock and started to massacre the unarmed fugitives sticking them with spears... 

Yet, on the whole, it is a useful monograph because of the authors, despite the fact they all were from the rotten West, had the courage of real scientists to honestly put their hands up and acknowledge: 
‘Alas! I fucking do not know what the fuck is this fucking schizophrenia about!’

‘Make sure to approach her tenderly,
Look deeply into her eyes,
You’ll find the treasure you have never seen!..’

On the present level of the research methodology, the science has only just the term ‘schizophrenia', everything else is wrapped in the dense mist of uncertainty. 

The main trump ace, touchstone and litmus test provided by the science are ‘the voices'. 
You meet them in any textbook on the psychiatry.
If you hear some voices and there is not a living soul around, then you are a schizophrenic.
But if them those voices say:
‘Save France!’
Then you're a Saint – Joan of Arc. 

The only weak point in the monograph was the absence of a theology expert.
Suffice it to recall St. Inez, whose body was in a split second covered with long fur canceling any possibility of the rapists to break her chastity.

They are enjoying cakes and ale in their picnic in the bed of roses, the specialists in the trade whose luminaries can’t see the misty core of what they are, actually, about.
To concoct a diagnosis is easier than making a fig. 
Pour half a glass raw schizophrenia, spice with a pinch of double-barreled adjectives, shake the ingredients…
Enjoy!
‘Fur-coat-like form of schizophrenia’, the favorite drink of St. Inez!

Tamara of the fourth kilometer was not in the know of all of my exploits.
For the burned down plantation of hemp, I could be easily stamped with ‘autodafic form of schizophrenia aggravated with Torquemada complex' in honor of that absolutely normal inquisitor who sent packs of heretics to the stake. 

For the term itself were used (as for the most part of terms in the scientific nomenclature) the words from old Greek which, when putting ancient roots together, mean ‘cracked mind’.
‘The mind cracked in the form of a fur coat.’
So, who of us is schizophrenic after all?!

They think that if they don the white medical coats and trumpet a trump from the terminology they themselves don’t know a damn thing in, I will believe them more than the Ichnya sorcerer in his khaki shirt and mumbling of the moon ‘quarters’?
Oh, my dear aesculapius-kindergarten kids! 
Mind you, I am from Konotop.
My classmate Volodya Sherudillo could casually give out:
‘I cannot ignore the data of quasi-pseudo illusions in order to avoid the ultimate diffusion of my transcommunicational skills.’

After the eighth grade he went to the ‘seminary', aka GPTU-4, otherwise, by now he would be Head of the Academy of Sciences and you would be sitting in the waiting room of his office in trembling expectation if he would, or wouldn't listen to you, the petty CEC khannoriks. 

In short, while no one knows where schizophrenia comes from and where goes to, and how much is her fee for a visit, you could just as well go and f-f.. fumble yourself against something else.
That is to say, go, sweet ones, go...) 

On the weekends in Nezhin the three of us had a walk to the kindergarten in the narrow streets of the neighborhood.
It did not work on Saturdays and the entire playgrounds—all those stalls and slides—were for you.
The swing hung on iron bars gave out the brief and shrill heartbreaking screams.
Eera stood in the distance.
And then you began running over the yellow leaves upon the ground from me to her and back, but even that did not bring us closer.

We were going back along the same empty streets without sidewalks.
I held your hand and did not take my eyes off the smooth play of round hips under the light dress of Eera walking ahead of me...

Tonya got an apartment for her family somewhere on the Shevchenko street.
Gaina Mikhailovna was planning to rent the freed bedroom to one of the military pilots from the Airfield-Area, who were howling in the sky with their training flights each Tuesday and Friday.
I was not present in any plans an even could not be because of Lenochka who I refused to leave in Konotop without a dad either.

Our quarrels with Eera became less desperate but more frequent.
I felt the steady progress towards the end when I would become a completely cut off chunk.

(...probably, Dostoevsky had the like feeling when they were driving him to the scaffold in a cart and, by the familiar streets, he was calculating how much more remained before the execution. 
The difference was only that I did not know how many words remained to hear from Eera before she’d say:
‘Get away to that Konotop of yours! And never show up in Nezhin!’
Yet, I knew that I would hear them…)

When Eera said so, then, along with the pain, there, strangely, came a little relief – nothing remained to be afraid of. 
It was finished.

I went to Konotop and began to live a half-life.
I worked with our team, read, wrote, talked, but half of me disappeared somewhere together with the aim for which I was doing all that before I had got cut off. 

The dullness of half-life was a bit alleviated by a business trip to Kiev.
I was alone there from the SMP-615, and I did not know where the rest of the workers came from to the reconstruction a dairy factory. 

We lived in a passenger car driven into a dead end in the factory grounds.
They gave us bed linen yellow with age and fairly fretted but gently soft because of that.
I occupied the upper bunk in a compartment to skip folding up the mattress in the morning.
And everywhere sounded one and the same song:

‘The leaves of yellow are twirling ‘round the city...’

And I remembered the leaves on the playgrounds in the deserted kindergarten.

On weekends I went to the library of Kiev University, in the building to the left from the monument to Taras Shevchenko.
People were allowed there without a diploma, leaving their passports in the entrance lobby.

In a huge but quiet reading room with long tables, there was a separate lamp with a shade for each reader. 
There I read in the original John Mill’s treatise ‘On Freedom’.

That’s what a real philosophy is!
He showed me that there are just two kinds of people:
1) law-abiding loyal subjects;
2) experimentalists.
And all race, class, confession differences are only a means of setting people against each other...

Then I found the House of Organ Music.
Looks like it was a Catholic church before, in the Red Army street under the Republican Stadium.

I was a little late for the concert with the door locked already, so I had to knock from outside.
They opened it and I cried as in the bus to Romny:
‘I have a ticket! I have a ticket!’
‘Very well. But could you be quieter? The concert is on.’
The hall there was right behind the entrance without any vestibule.
‘Excuse me.’
But he continued to murmur something else in discontent.
‘Wanna me apologize once more?’

And he shut up because under the intelligentsia style cloak that I doffed there was a blue corduroy jacket of workmen and peasants and when I took off my secret agent hat a strand of hair sprang like a spring stuck up from my head.
It was impossible to smooth it, even after the shower the stubborn strand, on getting dry, cocked up again.

(...about thirty years later, such explosion of hair became an everyday fashion. 
That’s how deeply I was shocked by separation from Eera…)

In the first part, they played some modern atonal symphony – a tormenting screech of shredded noted and shards of tunes. 
But in the second the organ sounded the fugues of Bach...

The miracle happened in January.
I arrived in Nezhin to visit Zhomnir and on a bus starting from the station I saw Ivan Alexeyevich.
He asked me how came I had not been seen for so long.
Restraining a sob in my throat, I replied that Eera had forbidden me to show up.
‘Forget it! Come on, let’s go!’
I still got off the bus on the Shevchenko street and later phoned from Zhomnir.
Eera also said, yes, come.
The remaining seven bus stops to Red Partisans I drove outwardly calm but with storm-churned waves inside. 

Many changes occurred in the months of my absence.
Eera moved together with you to the former Tonya’s family bedroom.
Her parents went over into the narrow bedroom.
The living room was left as it was: ‘The Unknown Beauty’ with the same contempt looked from the sideboard, and the rich merchant’s daughter crookedly trotted from the major pinching his mustache.

But in your bedroom there stood a new dressing table with a crowd of incomprehensible but so necessary cosmetic jars.
A wide yellow ring of gold lay close to the mirror.
To my cautious inquiries, Eera said that the pier was bought by her father and her mother presented her the ring. 
And we began to live on...

The construction site.
Nezhin.
The construction site.
Nezhin.

Eera worked as a caretaker in the kindergarten two hundred meters down the Red Partisans street.
Her duties included keeping records of the health state of children in her group.
By the mirror of the dressing table there lay a copybook with notes in her handwriting, with a slant to the left, how kids were each day of the week. 

I only once opened that copybook and after that, I tried not even to look at it so as not to die of jealousy. 
It became clear to me that there was no use anymore to tread the path of righteousness and no need to try escaping the inevitable because it had already happened. 

(...certain thoughts are better to be left alone and not thought at all but if you have still happened to start, they're better to be dropped and not thought all the way down their consequential road to the very end...) 

I felt ashamed of asking Eera how she lived these months and what she was doing in between my weekend visits, but when I saw in that copybook that on Thursday half Eera’s group came with a cold I knew that on Wednesday she was on a date.
I was dying of jealousy but kept silent.

Life became like a run through a maze – not to take that turn, not to look that side, not to think that thought…

Then Eera introduced the order to put you to sleep next to her on the double bed and I was moved out to the bed-chair.
Sometimes she came to me in the dark, sometimes not, and then I did not sleep for long over the midnight tormented by bitterness and jealousy.

Only one time I was happy about not having a sex with her.
An overcrowded bus with frost coated windows was driving me from the station to Red Partisans.
Somewhere halfway up I suddenly felt penetration into my anus.
They had never made me enema nor probe insertion in my life, so the feeling was unfamiliar and inexplicable amid a crowd of passengers in coats and sheepskins.
After the main square, the crowd thinned but I couldn't get rid of a feeling that I got raped in the rectum. 

It is for that reason that I did not insist on having a sex that night because I was afraid that Eera would later have it with the fucker who fucked me on the bus.
And what if...
The sequence of events could be the reverse, after all, but I swayed away that iffiness... 

At the end of February, there was a working Saturday, aka ‘black Saturday'. 
Each year had six Saturdays of that color and not only in the SMP-615.
However, I said a firm ‘no!’ and on Friday after work went to Nezhin.

I had a solitary dinner in the kitchen because Eera told you not to disturb your daddy when he’s eating and took you to the living room.
Then I went over to the bedroom so as not to disturb everyone in the living room watching TV.
Besides, there was no place to sit down because your aunt Vita had come from Chernigov to stay with her parents for the vacation.

You also came to the bedroom and we were a little noisy and Eera came to make out the beds for you and me.
She turned off the light so that you would fall asleep sooner and returned to the living room because on TV there was a replay of the New Year ‘Kinopanorama'. 
I stayed in the dark in front of the new dressing table.

I did not make any plans and everything went somehow by itself.
When the sound of your breathing showed that you were well asleep, I waited another five minutes and then took you over to the chair-bed.
Then I undressed and lay down on the matrimonial double.
I lay for a long time with my hands under my head.

The traffic along the Red Partisans street almost died our but the noise of the rare cars became even more unbearable and the glare of their headlight was creeping along the window curtains.
Poor Tonya. How could they live here?

Then I began to think about us with Eera: how could we come to live like this?
Here was I, for example, filled with just jealousy and the desire of having a sex with her.
All other feelings, besides these two, were successfully suppressed so that they would not bring more pain anymore.
Only these two were stronger than me.

And what about her?
At the institute, she was lucky to pull such a reputable trump from the pack. 
All the girlfriends withered with envy.

Girlfriends went away to their appointment places and the trump's reputation got wet. 
And then the mother with the gold ring.
You’re so young, a good man still will come round the corner, better if he were a military pilot, their salaries far above the misery 120 rubles.

And what in the end?
We just have what we have.
That Soviet Pushkin, the sycophant of a literary collaborator had called it lust.
Stupid nerd.
The lust comes when there is no more craving.

And again howling of a car.
This one comes from afar, from the Airfield-Area.
The light crawls up over the curtains, puts its back in an arc, and we found the way to avoid the stress caused by sharp interruption of the natural flow of the act in the final phase to control the birth rate, just like Arthur Clark’s astronauts jumping from one spaceship’s lock to another without any spacesuits through the open space, with a side bonus of using the seed for lotions with more beneficial effectiveness for the skin than that of mummia, ginseng, and even ojb grass because the inquisitive digressions of those loving to love their beloved lovingly will beat any Kama Sutra, I always knew that although have never read but is it worth while?..
Here’s another… they are just wrenching your soul out when passing by…
Poor Tonya, how could they live here?

Then from the door to the living room there came the farewell voices wishing good night.
Eera came into the bedroom.
In the light of the street lamp from the other side of the tulle curtain, she found the needed vial from the ranked by the dressing table mirror and went out again.
I got filled with tension.
She did not return for a long time and when she returned and closed the door she bent over you to listen if I was asleep.
You slept as an innocent baby and did not wake up. 

Eera lay by under the blanket, touched me, abruptly recoiled and cried out: 
‘You?! Get out of here!’
‘Come on, quiet...’
‘Dad!’

She called for help to get protected from me! 

I did not touch her, only lay idly resting my jaw in my hand, like a beach-goer estimating how many people were there in the water.
I turned into an outsider, an idle on-looker because everything somehow became all the same to me.
Calm, detached, I said: 
‘I’m fed up with you.’

Said I that? No! Not true! Not fed up! It's not me! 
And yet it was I who pronounced the words, the part of the ritual.
What ritual?!
It made no difference what.
I did not care anymore.

With my head still leaning against my hand, I held out the other and slapped it on the soft cheek.
I?!
Hit her?!
Of course, not.
It was not a blow, it was part of the ritual. 
She became speechless from astonishment but it was too late.

I dropped back against the pillow and pulled the blanket up to my chin.
The switch clicked, in the bright light from the ceiling, her parents and the sister crowded in the doorway.
She jumped out of the bed and joined the group.
Vita started to emit the traditional screams of a family squabble.

Ivan Alexeyevich in his pajamas stood with his head down.
I saw how difficult it was for him to make the decision.
What if I was naked? Before his princedom harem?
But there was nothing I could do to help him.
My role was that of an on-looker.

Finally, he made a decisive step, even two, grabbed my hand sticking from under the blanket and pulled me onto the rug on the floor.
The blanket remained on the bed.

I lay a little down there while my mother-in-law was reading Prayers at the Departure of the Soul, to the tune how hugely shameless I was to lay prostrate before ladies in such an undressed state.
Underpants and a tank-top may be a decent sportswear in the stadium, but not in the presence of a mother-in-law.

I silently got up and, quite unexpectedly even for myself, made a deep bow to shake off the non-existent dust from the hair below my knees. 
A ritual makes us follow its canon even if we have no idea of it.

‘We shall renounce the old world of tyrants,
We shall shake off its ashes from out feet!..’

I dressed and went out into the hallway.
The mother-in-law followed.
To make sure I would not open the refrigerator?

She was replaced by a quiet, attentive Eera.
I gave her one ruble and asked to pass it to Vita who lent me the sum a week earlier.
She nodded.
I took a piece of paper out of my briefcase and wrote a note to Vita with gratitude for the ruble.
Even the grave cannot fix a graphomaniac.

The night was quiet and windless.
I spent it standing at the nearest bus stop the way I was standing in front of a ticket office at the Odessa airport locked for the midday break.
Only now there were no roses in my hand.

‘The Sun was never any match for you,
Brother Rain,
That is true from any point of view,
Brother Rain.
Twining in the dates too rare,
Stuck in love and black despair,
Shedding diamond tears in vain,
Tears of ecstasy and pain
Go your way and get away, Brother Rain...’

It was a quiet indifferent midwinter night.
In all that night three cars passed the bus stop, one of them Volga.
I did not care.
Numbness of the senses.
In the one-story building opposite, the light went on and, soon after, off, twice; should be an elderly person going to the toilet and back.

In the gray dark twilight, the first bus appeared from the Airfield-Area and drove me to the station. 

At half past seven, I got off the local train in Konotop. 
I do not know where I spent the following hour because when I came to 50-apartment block the black Saturday was in full swing.
The bulldozer in the future yard roared and, wrapped in the blue mist of smoke from its exhaust pipe, was burying itself in the hill of earth it moved ahead.
Grinya and Lyda had already been changed into their spetzovkas and padded jackets.
‘You did not go to Nezhin?' Lyda asked. 
‘No.’

I took a sheet of paper from my briefcase with the report to the trade union committee how were spent 3 rubles when visiting a patient in the hospital.

(...my next public position was to visit the SMP-615 employees when they got to the hospital and comfort them with a delivery from the trade union committee which allocated 3 rubles for the purpose. 
I was visiting the colleagues solo, but the report on spending the amount of 3 rubles should have three signatures for it was a huge sum of money…)

I put the paper on the side of a concrete pipe 1.5 meters in diameter and 1.5 meters long and they signed it without reading. 
‘Now?’ asked Grinya, ‘Are you changing or what?’
I was always opposing black Saturdays but what else had I to do?
I changed into the work clothes and went with my shovel to clean the upshot truck-dump with the mortar stuck to it replacing Vera Sharapova.
She had already noticed long ago that it was the way I drove away my jealousy fits.

In the evening, at 13 Decemberists, I was lying prostrate in the armchair-bed in the dark living room. 
Laying all the time on your back is really tiring.
I wanted to move and turn over but I did not allow myself to stir because I needed to become inconspicuous, and movements betray you.

When motionless, I became part of the bottom of an infinite and immensely empty world.
To be part of it you should be smoothly streamlined and produce no rips so that nothing would cling to you and float past and further, along its way.
But what a vast emptiness it was!

(...there is a no worse curse than the old folk curse ‘be it empty to you!' 
The purpose of any loss is to make you feel empty, deprived of something.
To feel you are empty of something. 

Love comes as a defensive reaction to the endless empty repetition of the life's mill-wheel returning to where from where it had started as empty as it returned. 
Love comes to protect from despair, when you're empty of any idea how to dispose of the accidental and vain gift – your life – when you find no means to kill the eternity measured out to you. 
When you feel at loose ends, having nothing to live for but for aimless living on.
Love comes to fence off empty questions, to present your life with some meaning – to serve! – to give it the point – to serve!

Love is a self-denying slavery and zealous service for the object of love  – a two-legged mammal, or a collection of stamps, or … no matter… it depends on how lucky you are… 

And then, like a bolt from the blue, the shackles are torn, you are said: get out!
You are freed!

And you find yourself in the void where there is no purpose, no sense, where you have just to live – like a crystal, like grass, like a rain-worm. 
We are not slaves, slaves are not we!

No! I want back! To where love is…
It would save from the horror of facing the emptiness, it would give meaning to the senseless fuss.
Love will be the one to make decisions.
I will obediently obey the orders!

Love is the sand where to bury the frightened ostrich head…

Damn you, love!
How empty it feels without you!..)

Surviving in the void is not an easy problem.
Of course, there is always a choice.
Why survive if you can stop the torment any moment? 
However, never in my life had I even played with the thought of suicide.
Not programmed that way.

Well, and since there was no choice, I had to solve the problem.
The solution is only one – systematicy.
Nothing else can overcome emptiness.
Whether you’re systematically jamming vodka, or systematically jogging in the park does not matter much.
What's important, is a repetition of a certain cycle. 

I was happy to have some investments giving certain means of spanning the void.

The five-day work week, that’s for one.
My participation in the SMP-615 public life – two.
And also, visits to Nezhin for intellectual communication with Zhomnir with a periodicity of two or three months. 
Who would ask for more?

Any system, so that it works, needs some sort of a carrot as a reward for spinning the wheel, for successfully concluding its vicious circle and a stimulation for going into the next, exactly the same rotation.

On Thursdays, I visited the bathhouse with two turns into the steam room. 
Bars of soap and vehniks, aka bunches of dried birch twigs for self-whipping in the steam room, were sold in the bathhouse ticket office on the first floor.
I left those instruments of pleasure on the low tables with gray marble tops in the common washing hall on the second floor taking home only replaced underwear for subsequent laundry.

On my way from the bathhouse to the place of residence I consumed two bottles of Zhigulevskoye beer and bought an issue of 'Morning Star' from the news stall on the Peace Square for reading with a dictionary until next Thursday.

On Mondays, I did washing in a tin basin on the bench in the yard, in winter the washing was done in the summer room section of the shed. 
The ironing day depended on the weather conditions around the cloth-line, which was stretched from the porch to the shed and not to the gate anymore. 
Better late, than never.

Weekends were harder to fill, but once a month in ‘The Peace’ cinema they showed another of action movies starring Belmondo, or a comedy with Jean Richard.

Summer Sundays were no problem at all, I spent them on the Seim beach lying on the pink cover with red circles for wrapping babies.
The same one which on weekdays was used as the table cover to iron dry washing.
The blanket was left at 13 Decemberists after one of your visits there.
It was rather short and my legs, in part, remained stretched out over the sand, but who cares?

Three times a Sunday I had a swim for the buoys, where there were no screaming bathers, lay on my back on the water, with my arms outstretched sideways, and pronounced the home-made ritual formula:
‘Oh, water! Ran into each corner of mine! We are of one blood – thou and me.' 

(...to assemble such a phrase I had to involve Fitzgerald and Kipling in collaboration, but they did not mind my plagiarism…)

Then I swam back to the screams and splashes, got back to the coverlet and turned on it from side to side frying myself in the sun, between the periods of reading 'Morning Stars'.
On the beach I read it without a dictionary, underlining the words which had to be written out later in a copybook.

At the midday meal time, I left the beach and went to the store in Khutor Taransky. 
It was a casual hutta under a thatched roof but with a thick iron strap across its door and a massive padlock.
The store manager, the elderly burly woman, who was proud of her having seen even the Sakhalin Island, unlocked the door for only one hour.

When she dropped the iron strap on the porch, the door opened into a room with two dust-covered windows in the same wall with the door, and the plank counters running along the remaining three walls with doubled wide shelves above them. 

I systematically bought one sample of canned food, a pack of cookies and a bottle of lemonade.
After opening the feast items with the opener borrowed from the store manager, I took the meal out to the completely empty street of four huttas and deep sizzling hot sand in the road.
There I sat on the wide bench of a cracked but mighty board turned gray by the years of exposure to the whims of weather going its unchanging season circles around the tree over the bench and the thatched hutta of the store nearby.

The assortment of things on the store shelves never changed.
Buying a can of ‘Tourist’s Breakfast’, I saw that next Sunday I would have ‘Sprats in Tomato Sauce’ for the meal and a week later ‘Zucchini Squash’.
The can with the sticker ‘Adjika’ instilled obscure fears because I had heard it somewhere it was hotter than even wasabi, but it was still a month away.
Maybe, I’d combine it with the small jar of cherry jam from the following shelf?
It would be a complex dinner.

In the end, I wiped the aluminum spoon with the wrapper from the finished off cookies and hid it at the back of the hatta, in the thatched straw over the blind wall, the way kulak bandits had been hiding their barrel sawed shotguns. 
Even Marcello Mastroianni could not be dreaming of a sweeter ‘Dolche Vita’.

And right in that hutta, I had bought a doll for your birthday present. 
There were only two rubber dolls on the shelves – a girl and a monkey.
Each one had a tiny squeaker in its back to make a sound when pressed.
The pair of motorcyclists, who managed to overcome the deep sand of the road that day, advised me to but the monkey, but I took the girl as I had planned on previous Sundays, in a bright dress—also rubber—to her knees.

I could buy a present from the Department Store in the city, of course, but all the toys there were made of plastic.
Besides, I wanted it to be a gift from that enchanted hutta with its cool shade in the middle of the summer heat...

Although I am not sure if any system would save me without our team application to it.
This isn’t meant to say that the team members surrounded each other with caring attention, tenderness and moral support.
Like hell, they would! 

In our team, as anywhere else, they were all too glad to have a good laugh at your expense.
And everybody had a family and kids of their own as an outlet for their tender care.
Except for the red-hair Peter Kyrpa, aka Kyrpanos, but eventually, he also got lassoed and corralled and broken in as a family man by Raya, from the team of plasterers. 

And yet, from 8 am to 5 pm our team, with all their personal problems and concerns, became one family.
For all the hole-picking jokes in each other’s address, you wouldn’t be a victim of a detrimental practical joke with smoldering cotton or any other injury endangering one.

Do bricklayers use taboo words in ladies presents?
Both yes and no.

I had never heard a four-letter word addressed to any woman in our team.
Never.

But when the crane operator puts a pallet of bricks on your foot, you report it to the whole world—and very loudly too—without paying much attention if there were ladies around.

Are women of a bricklayer team using taboo words? 
Both no and yes.

At the moments threatening with trauma or loss of life, they shout ‘Oy! Mamma!' 
Or just scream.
Whereas in the intervals between shoveling mortar to the boxes for bricklayers, or rigging the brick pallets with the steel prickly cables, Katerina could easily share the folklore song:

‘Go fuck yourself, you dumbos, you’re stupider than they said,
Not allowing marry your daughter? So fuck her in my stead!..' 

I admit, that replaying this particular folklore piece in my brain convolutions sometimes served me as a good painkiller.

But, after all, is the foul language the only thing to frown at in the world?

The bricklayer Lyubov Andreyevna once complained to the head engineer, who accidentally dropped in at the construction site, about the insulting words of our foreman Mykola Khizhnyak by which he identified all women indiscriminately: 
‘Inside-out insoles!’

Up to now, I haven’t the slightest idea what it could mean, but she somehow got hurt.

Probably, because of she was the most beautiful woman on our team, only sad at times. 
It is sad for a woman to know she’s beautiful and, at the same time, not knowing what to do with her beauty and only watch how it flows away in vain.
She had a husband five years younger than her.
Before their marriage, he was walking around with a knife hidden in his high boot and she had made of him an exemplary family man and a safe member of society. 
But she still remained sad, especially in winter frosts, when the mortar in the boxes would develop a centimeter thick ice crust while climbing through the air to the line.
‘Oy, Mamma! How do my little hands get numb with cold!' 
And that parasite of Sehryoga would readily respond from the other end of the line:
‘Serves you good! Your mummy-daddy kept telling you “dear daughter, study well so you’ll become an accountant!”
And what was your answer?
“No! I love the shovel forever!”
So now shut up and love it until you get blue!’
‘Parasite!’

Anna Andreyevna was not as beautiful as Lyubov Andreyevna, but she was kind.
Especially after the break for the midday meal. 

Almost the whole team lived in the At-Seven-Winds and went home in the break for the midday meal.
Now, she would accompany her meal with a couple of shots and return to the workplace softened and kind-hearted. 
Her only drawback, that she was hunting my hammer.
The moment my vigilance got slacken, she’d snatch the hammer and bury it in the wall with mortar.
Most bricklayers cut bricks with their trowels but I, for righteousness sake, did it with the hammer.

Lyda’s and Vita’s husbands were the SMP-615 employees as well.
They were locksmiths in the production building in the base grounds under the supervision of the chief mechanic.
And they, naturally, were drinking. 
And the following morning in the bricklayers' trailer you for one whole hour had to listen to curses to those bastards who were not even around anywhere.

Although the curses from Lyda were listenable, she sang them out like a song with Vita’s backing in the background.

Vita herself was not really eloquent.
When we were finishing off the uppermost part of the walls on the 110-apartment block, for the final bridging with roof slabs, she was next to me in the line of the bricklayers and when I jumped over the wall then all she could say after me was: 
‘Sehrguey! Where to?’

The brick courses laid by me needed jointing so I jumped outside onto the concrete awning over a balcony on the fifth floor.
But she had no idea about that awning!
Now, a man is diving from the roof of a five-story building and all she’s prepared to say was:
‘Sehrguey! Where to?’

Here's, in a nutshell, the female logic, and knowledge of physics – down, of course, I had jumped! 
Where else?

Our team was young.
The oldest bricklayer in our team, forty-year-old Grigory Grigoryevich said it directly:
‘We’re still young.’

He had exceptional pedagogic skills and when noticed that his son, a ninth grader, somewhere on a tram, or a street, was gaping at a woman worthy of looking at, he'd never miss the chance of seizing the opportunity: 
‘Wanna get you some of that sort? Study well, bastard!' 
He had a round Napoleonic face because of the thin hair strand on his forehead.
And he was a solid, burly man.
More than once I tried to overtake him in laying a brick course – no go.
He would finish when I still had to lay some ten bricks.
And he was very judicious.
Only once his common sense gave in.
That time he brought to the construction site his double-barreled hunting rifle after the midday break. 
The site was in ‘no man, but builders' land' at the edge of the At-Seven-Winds. 
And then a young construction superintendent Sereda, stopped by from the SMP-615 base grounds.
Grigory Grigoryevich allowed him too to hold the weapon.
He even started an argument, that Sereda would not even hit his hat thrown up into the air.

We went around the end wall of the unfinished building.
It was the white silence all around and only the tree trunks of a distant forest belt were contrasting the snow with their dark.
And he threw his hat up—high, so high—and Sereda waited for a second and pulled the trigger. 
The hat twitched in its flight and fell like a hit bird.
Grigory Grigoryevich raised it and there was a hole in the hat top, two fingers easily ran through.
The buckshot turned out to be too large, for boars.
But it had been a good hat of nutria fur.
It's only he did not consider logically that Sereda was from Transcarpathia and though there remained no Bandera men already the firearms survived, hence the skills. 

And the rigger Vera Sharapova was never sad.
She was singing all the time, laughing.
Ready to keep up a talk with anyone.
And she also was the most beautiful, but only at work, while dressed in her workman padded jacket and spetzovka pants.
But when she changed to go by the local train to her Kukolka station the beauty disappeared somewhere.

I do not know why it made me sad when she was telling about her wedding party and everyone around laughed along with her.
‘The kids a-crying, Peter a-playing!’
Peter was that humpback mujik who took her even with two children of hers.
He also was an itinerant from Kukolka to Konotop and knew how to play the accordion. 
Some noisy wedding it turned out.

Vera Sharapova was very keen and she noticed that when someone complained of having a headache I would take out a handkerchief from my spetzovka pants pocket and turn it inside out.
At times she would nudge Katerina, say, watch the miracles of my training, then press her hand to her forehead and make a pain-ridden face:
‘Oh, what a headache I have!’
I, naturally, saw through all that comedy, but nonetheless, I did my role in the procedure. 
However, when Katerina also started to rub her temples, I would say that the reception was over – the facility served one patient per day.
Harry Potter had not been conceived yet.

Peter Lysoon was not always a bricklayer. 
Earlier in his career, he had a job of a security in railway gold transportation. 
There was a special squad of armed securities to accompany safes in luggage cars.
They had long trips, sometimes for weeks.
The floor of the car swayed to the clang of wheel pairs on the rail joints and thoughts of all sorts were spinning on and on.
Say, what way, for example, that gold could be taken?
One day they were spinning, another day – sometimes for weeks at a stretch. 
But no spinning could bring an answer to that insoluble problem.
He would take a look at the faces of his fellow securities – they were also thoughtful.
And what about?
And then a fear started to creep in – what if some of them had thought out a working solution?
Readied a plan, found accomplices, and at some point of the endless way trash all the squad with one clip and leave with the gold? 

Peter got tired of waiting and became a bricklayer...

With his skinny, short stature, Grinya reminded me somehow of German general Guderian whom I never saw in my life. 
There was in his appearance something vaguely suggestive of the General Stuff, more exactly that of the Wehrmacht.
On weekends he took rest from blitzkriegs and went on a fishing trip with Grigory Grigoryevich.
Everywhere in the reach of local and diesel trains.
They were fishing with fishing rods of different length, longer in the summer, short for ice fishing.

I was bribed by his faith in my healing talent.
That time he stopped me on the flight of stairs leading just to heaven because of absence any roof yet.
‘Sehryoga, help!’
And, lifting his upper lip, he showed a whitish pimple on the gum.
Then he unfastened the safety pin from the inside pocket of his workman padded jacket, where he kept his wristwatch during working hours and handed it to me: 
‘Pierce the bitch, it hurts too much.’
I started excuses that it was not possible there amid the dust and mud, without antiseptics.
The operation needed disinfection.
‘What disinfection do you want of me here?’
In some movies, they were disinfecting things with open fire.

He held the pin tip over a lit match.
The result did not comfort me – the tip got covered with black soot.
Grinya critically examined the pin, wiped the soot against the sleeve of his padded jacket with layers of brick dust and other sediments and held it out to me:
‘Take! Do it!’
And I shut up. 
The man spent so many efforts on disinfection...

Mykola Khizhnyak appeared in Konotop as those dark-haired and curly heroes of French novels that come to Paris with a couple of sous in their pockets and ambitious plans to conquer the capital.
True, he had a three-ruble bill and, instead of a slouch hat with a feather, there was a forage cap on his head, incapable to protect in the thirty-degree frost on the night of his arrival. 
He had not become the Captain of musketeers but he is the only bricklayer of the sixth category known to me.

As such, he had an apartment and a motorcycle Ural without a stroller and his wife Katerina and, if you could not get sleep at night, you could grab her by the ears and pull under.

And it was Mykola Khizhnyak making up for the knowledge I omitted at the institute.
When studying at English Department of the NGPI, I could not force myself to read a single work by Thomas Hardy, although he was in the examination questions.
Somehow, I had incompatibility with him.
Probably, because of his name, I don’t know.
I knew, that it was necessary, but I couldn’t.

Once on the slabs, Mykola began to tell me a long and winding story.
At first I thought it was some TV series and only at the very end, when the pursuit overtook her, but she was asleep from fatigue and he said to let her sleep a bit while she did not know she got caught I realized that it was ‘Tess of the D'Urbervilles' notwithstanding that Khizhnyak had woven some flight ticket into the plot... 

But officially the most beautiful woman on our team was the rigger, Katerina. 
Vera Sharapova never hesitated to say it her directly, even though she knew it herself, especially since she was the foreman's wife, even though not registered, but they had already had a seventh grader son from her first marriage. 

On her head, Katerina wore a scarf made of a translucent fabric over her yellow curls, and on her neck a necklace of large red beads. 
To suit the color of the lipstick on her lips.

Somewhere in the stacks of bridging slabs, by the heap of dumped mortar, she had a triangular fragment of a thick mirror to look into at her spare time.
She considered herself as beautiful as Anfisa from the TV series ‘The Ugryum River’ after she became the vision because of whom Gromov flung himself off the cliff.

In any case, it was with that spook gesture that she beckoned to me from the brick debris scattered on the ground when I was laying the corner of the fourth floor, the morning after that series: 
‘Come on, Proshka! Come to me!’
Or maybe she just wanted to check if I was crazy enough for the dive.
After all, it was clear that the one was not all there and even turned away from a live porn. 

That time two couples wanted to have a sex in the bosom of nature and left the city for a distance of two hundred meters from the At-Seven-Winds.
They used the strip of bush as a screen from the highway.

Pissing with passion, they did not take into account the nearby construction site and our team put their hand tools aside and exchanged expert comment during the combined action, like the Romans in the stands of Coliseum, when it did not yet require major repairs.

(...in the stagnation era in our land they did not yet know a totalizator so there were no betting on which of the mating pairs will cum first…) 

But how relative is everything in this world!
You come first and Anna Andreyevna, sitting over the shovel handle, thrown across the iron box with mortar, would say: 
‘Phui! And that's your best?' 

And only the one that not all there, turned away, sat low by the brick pallet and watched in the opposite direction with a distant group of birches in the middle of ‘no man, but builders’ land’ as tall as the trees in the African Savannah.
A normal one wouldn’t behave like that...

Before his marriage, Peter Kyrpa lived with his mother and in the winter season kept bragging regularly how on the morning of that day he went out into their hutta’s corridor-hallway broke the ice in the bucket with a tin mug and drank the water so cold that it was entering the teeth.
I liked him less than anyone else on our team, but it became him who had helped me to prove to everyone and, moreover, to myself that I was a true bricklayer.
It happened much later when the fresh blood in the form of two girls who graduated from a vocational school someplace in Western Ukraine and the former paratrooper Vovka joined our team.

At that time we were finishing the second floor of the machine shop floor building opposite the canteen for the locomotive driving teams.
When the brick wall reaches 1.2 meters it is continued from trestles put close by it.
Between Kyrpa and me there were two of such trestles which accounts for a distance of about 15 meters.
He wanted to show off before the pair of young girls in fresh padded jackets, who often used in their talk the funny sounding ‘yoy!’
So he shouted:
‘Here, Sehryoga!’
And he hurled a hammer in my direction over the pallets and boxes in between us two.
The tool flew like a tomahawk spinning around its hilt. 

I did not have time for calculations and I did not calculate anything.
I just stepped forward and raised my right hand.
The moment as the hammer handle touched my palm all there remained to do was to squeeze my fingers in a grab.
Everything turned out all by itself.

Seeing that I did not duck behind the brick pallet to evade his throw but that I stood with the hammer held in my proudly raised hand, Kyrpa flip-flopped at once and said to the girls who suddenly turned mute:
‘That’s what bricklayers are there on our team!’
So I have something to be proud of in my life...

In addition to the rubber doll from the village store, I collected a whole gift set for your birthday.
There were those glossy plastic what-you'd-call-thems which electricians insert into the junction boxes.
They looked like little ninja turtles, although before the production of that cartoon there remained more than twenty years.
The pieces’ similarity to turtles was evident at once only it wasn’t discovered yet that they were ninjas.
Besides, there were white ceramic checkers.
All the set items in two pieces, except for the doll.

(...this, like, a soldier on the front collects a present from brass shot cartridges.
However, our team was indeed at the forefront of the world mastered by humans.
Gifts from the edge of the ecumene…) 

It was important for me to get to Nezhin at a fitting time when no one would intercept and spoil the holiday.
The local train from Konotop, moreover on your birthday, was easy to ambush with a black and white tartan and then just a slight swishing touch against my jeans and all’s derailed.
It was wiser to approach from the rear where I could not be expected from.

The bus Kharkov-Chernigov suited the purpose ideally but it passed Konotop five thirty in the morning that’s why I did not go to sleep that night so as not to oversleep.
I was just walking around Konotop in different directions.

When I walked along the concrete wall of the Meat-Packing Plant there was a crowd of cattle driven through the roofed gallery up there to the slaughter work floor.
With what human voices they were screaming!
Worse than in ‘The Western Corridor’.
And, they absolutely got it – where they were being driven and why.

About midnight I was on the Kandybino and decided to take a swim.
I stripped down and entered the water in the altogether. 
And who would see?
The dark currant bushes on the shore, or the stars with the moon?
They had seen more than that.
And I plunged ahead.

And the darkness around was trembling with frogs moans.

One plasterer, an elderly female already, but sporting long tight braids, told me that when she wanted to commit suicide in her village, the same night it was and the air was filled with buzzing whisper:
‘Come on! Here it is, the pond! Go into!' 
But I did not have any voices, only the frogs.

And then I swam towards the moon.
It had just risen over the fish lakes and didn’t have time to grow little in the sky.
The huge full moon.

I swam with sidestroke, soundlessly, but still pushed waves before me.
Smooth evenly rounded waves, like those lines printed in the handkerchief with the sailboat.
Only there they were blue on a white background and here silver against black darkness.
And they were moving, as the waves of ether, until pond weed began to cling to my feet.
It was scary, all slimy mermaids came on thought and I swam back, but already on my back so that to watch the moon all the time.

My hair was wet after swimming and I slowly strolled to the station so that it would dry on the way.
At the station, there were huge clocks on the front and back walls, and two more inside, in the halls. 
That’s why I went to the station.
I did not have a watch, when I tried to wear one or another on my wrist it would stop in a day or two, or they started to show a wrong time and should be taken to repair or replaced with a new one.

Along the way, I remembered that unfortunate guy from the Arab Nights fairy tales who cried all the time and kept tearing the clothes on his chest. 
He loved a beautiful sorceress, and she loved him but warned that a certain door in her palace should never be opened. 
And he opened it—out of pure curiosity—and got into another dimension with only sand and stones around and no way back. 
Then all that remained to him was to cry and beat himself in the chest...

About two years before that I went with Eera to the Desna river.
Just we two, she and I.
Gaina Mikhailovna was keeping you that day.
We went there by the morning bus to Chernigov.
And how would we return?
Well, something would turn up…

When I saw the Desna through the bus window, I asked the driver to pull up and we got off to the highway.
Then we were going over a field.
In another, nearby field, women in white kerchiefs were raking hay into mounds, from afar you could not make out what century you were in.
Then I carried Eera on my back over a channel to a long spit of sand overgrown with wide green leaves past which the Desna flowed.
We spread a blanket over the leaves and spent all day there.

When I felt a need to take a leak I swam to the other bank, the river was not too wide there.
Eera had strictly warned me not to drench my head.
I remembered that and all the same from the other, steep bank I plunged headlong into the river.
And now all that’s left was to cry and tear that acetate silk summer T-shirt on my chest...

The rest of that night I sat on the square between the station and the first platform.
The benches there were not very comfortable, without the backrests.
Sitting on one of them I met rare night trains, along with the trolleys of the on-duty workers from the luggage office to which the workers of postal cars threw out boxes and bales of parcels.
And from the same bench, I was seeing off the groups of chilly yawning passengers. 
Have a good trip.
When the black box of the clock on the front wall of the station lit up 05:00, I went to the waiting hall to collect the cardboard box with the gifts from the automatic storage cell and from there to the bus station.
It’s close by, almost immediately behind the Loony park.

The Kharkov-Chernigov bus did not pass through Nezhin, but from the turn of the highway with the round building of the traffic police post, there again something turned up so that about nine in the morning I was already in Nezhin.
At that time the local train from Konotop was only approaching Bakhmach.

But I did not want to be a bolt from the blue. 
That's why I called Eera at her workplace from a pay phone booth. 
What a beautiful voice she had!
So mellow, so dear.
I said that I wanted to see you and present a birthday gift and she answered that, yes, of course, that you were at home with her mother. 

I went to Red Partisans with joy churning in my chest because Eera on the phone sounded quite friendly and even somehow pleased.

The door did not open, only the peephole darkened momentarily and brightened up again.

I pushed the doorbell button again, but shorter, and I heard footsteps cautiously departing from the hallway.
I also heard your voice complaining about something from the doorway to the living room and how your grandmother was shushing you in a whisper. 

If a person has voices from a psychiatry textbook, they tell him something.

I couldn’t make out any words but through the door I could clearly see you, a four-year-old kid, anxiously looking up at your grandma – who’s there? the gray wolf? a bad uncle?
And I saw Eera’s mother in the six-month perm-wave with her finger pressed to her lips:
‘Shush!’

I am not of those who break into a locked door, and I did not want to scare you any further.

I rang to the opposite door on the landing and it opened.
There lived a pair of teachers at the NGPI.
Groza-husband, he taught scientific Communism, and Groza-wife, who was teaching me German in my second year of study there.
I left the box with the Grozas and asked to hand it to you personally.

And to Konotop I could return already by a local train.
What’s the difference?
Just 1 ruble 10 kopecks...

(...an attempt to live a righteous life causes a bad habit in a person.
Not a detrimental one, but, at any rate, meaningless – you fall in the rut of that business and keep on even knowing there’s no difference…)

After the final and even ritually confirmed break-up with Eera, the return of ‘The Godfather’—the last of the books I had stolen—made no sense, but it was too late, I got addicted.

The book stayed by me because I did not know where Vitya Kononevich was appointed to work, but then I got the information that it was not Zhora from whom Vitya borrowed the book, but from Sasha Nesterook, her real owner.
I had to go to Nezhin again.

When I came to the address given to me by Vasya Kropin, Sasha Nesterook was not there.
The place was already rented by a young married couple.
The young man wore a white tank-shirt, his wife a dressing gown and the apartment richly smelled with grease smoked herring.
What else could be needed for happiness?
An apartment, a young woman at any time of the day.

I refused the address of their landlady who, perhaps, knew where Sasha Nesterook moved.
Stopping the search, I went back to Konotop.
I remembered that in the last year at the institute, Igor Recoon became close friends with Nesterook.
My intention was to give the book to Igor and let him pass it instead of me.
Anyway, I got fed up with the path of righteousness.

On the train, I for the first time was visited by the thought – maybe just so it was necessary? 
A woman of your own, of course, is a good thing, whichever way you turn it, but why then I did not envy the young lodger?
And why was I tickled with an inexplicable laughter when recollecting the herring and white tank-top?. 

Igor’s mother said that he was not at home and that he worked on the first floor in the building of the City Party Committee.
That building was by the Peace Square, behind the gray monument of Lenin where once stood the tower of the city television studio before it was dismantled.

At the entrance to the City Party Committee, I told the militiaman which room and to whom I was going to and he let me pass. 

The room was empty, but the moment I came up to the window, Igor got in.
He obviously did not want me to see what I saw.

He had not changed at all.
The same glasses of tea color in a golden frame and the same smirk on the sharp face.
Only the air got condescending.
Clear enough!
The man got on the rails of a wide road to a brighter future.
‘The Godfather’ almost failed to surprise him and he promised to pass the book to Sasha Nesterook.

Probably, it's nice to feel superior to someone who, when entering the NGPI, looked so much superior to you because he was after the army and you only a month before had received your school certificate. 
But now he was slavering on a construction site and you had an office in the City Party Committee, albeit having to share the office room with another functionary.

And I have never met Igor again, but I managed to catch a glimpse through the window in his career-starting room and see the strip of the cracked asphalt of the blind area under the wall, the sun-killed lawn, and the facade plaster ‘coat’ on the blank opposite wall, under opaque gray whitewashing and – nothing else.

To whatever heights had he risen in his future career, he would never see that group of birches among the construction sites of the At-Seven-Winds that looked like tall trees in the summer haze of African Savannah.
Even if you point at them, he would not see...

Still, I was persistently harassed by a sticky hope…
Eera’s voice, that talked to me on the phone seemed so joyful.
What if?. 

And it was nothing of her fault that my mother-in-law decided to expose me before you as a brutal door-kicker.
She certainly had not even consulted with Eera, whose voice sounded like my Eera’s voice…

To certify these hopes, I went to the Intercity Telephone Station, next to the Main Post Office.

The glass door and walls separated me from the noise of the tramcars and fuss in front of the Department Store.
The woman behind the glass barrier along the counter wrote down the city and the number I was calling. 

She passed the receipt to me and I paid for a three-minute talk.
She took off the receiver from the phone on her desk and told someone to give Nezhin, 4-59-83.
I slipped the receipt into the back pocket of my jeans and became one of the few waiting. 

When somewhere in another city someone was picking the receiver off the ringing phone they were told that it was Konotop online and the black loudspeaker in the station hall shouted in a female voice which booth to go in for a talk with that city. 

Behind the glass inserted in the door of the indicated booth, a light bulb lit up revealing a narrow compartment squeezed by yellow chipboard plates. 
The expectant entered the said booth with the phone on a small plywood shelf in the corner next to the crimson-plush covered seat of a high stool.
I do not know if it’s soft or hard, I have never sat down.

‘Alma-Ata! The number does not answer! What will you do?’
‘Repeat!’
In the loudspeaker floated up a distant echoing of long telephone rings in the faraway Alma-Ata.

‘Petrozavodsk! Cabin Twelve!’

What they were talking about could not be heard from the station hall, unless they started to yell because of a faulty connection.

‘Alma-Ata! The number does not answer! What will you do?’
‘Take off!’
The one with impracticable expectations returned the receipt and got their money back.

‘Nezhin's online!' 

I entered the booth and turned my back to the station hall behind the glass in the upper half of the door.
It’s very difficult to talk with your heart going pit-a-pat up in your throat.

‘Call Eera, please.’
‘Who’s talking?’
‘Sehrguey Ogoltsoff.’
‘Now...’

‘Yes.’
And the beating at once receded, clenched by the permafrost breath coming from her voice.

I said hello, was saying something else but I heard that I could never get through that dead tightened ice.

‘Look, I’m not asking anything, but the girl needs a father.’
‘Do not worry, she has a father already.’
‘Yes? It’s.. good.’
The conversation was over.

I went directly to the exit but in the glass cage of its vestibule, I looked back at the booth where the light had already gone out. 
And I said to myself:
‘Look well, number seven. That’s the number where you get crucified.’...

Where is the UK, and where is Konotop, but – lo and behold! – because of that kingdom, or rather because of that kingdom's communists, and, to the pointed point, because of their ‘Morning Star' newspaper that summer, I missed the wedding of my sister Natasha. 

After all, if you think carefully, it’s ‘Morning Star’ to be blamed for my re-entry into the madhouse.

(…With the daily reading of news that half a month before were news in foggy Albion you begin to sympathize with the Labor movement and the names of Michael Foote and Tony Benn become not so empty as the names of Suslov, or Podgorny, or whoever else was among the members of that Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the CPSU. 
The head of British government, Margaret Thatcher ceases to be ‘Dear Mrs. Margaret Thatcher!’, as read by Brezhnev out from the sheet of his welcome speech.
She becomes that iron bitch who starved to death twenty-nine Irish guys who wanted to wear sweaters in their prison cells.
That is, there is a shift towards an inadequate perception of the surrounding realities. 
You start to behave like a miner from Kent County or a public utility worker in the city of Manchester. 

Of course, I could refer to the lack of awareness – after all, I lived in the era of stagnation and did not suspect about it.
However, this is a weak excuse, because equally ignorant of the fact was the KGB officer, who answered the phone call from the SMP-615…)

At the height of summer, when the battle for the harvest was unfolding on the fields of our Homeland, when the miners of Kuzbass region promised to give out the millionth ton of black gold in the current year, when he, the mentioned KGB officer, still could not make up his mind whether to go on Saturday to his dacha in the Zholdaky village, or still drive to the Desna river, from where the second week at a stretch mujiks were returning with a good catch…
The telephone rang.
Emergency Accident.
There’s a strike in the SMP-615 and sit-down demonstration.
How many strikers?
One.
Where exactly?
On the porch of the administrative building.
‘Do nothing before the arrival of our staff.’

Yes, I was sitting on the wide concrete two-step porch of the two-story administrative building.
Yes, it was a strike, because at ten in the morning, instead of chinking my trowel against the bricks being laid in the course, I changed clothes in our team trailer in the At-Seven-Winds and showed up at the base of the SMP-615.
Yes, it was a sit-down strike and so as to be seated with more comfort I took a wooden chair from the watchman house at the gate and dragged it onto the porch of the administrative building.

It was a classic summer day, in the blue sky above the production building a huge mass of a single, brightly white cloud hung motionlessly. 
Along the high railway embankment, express trains flew past the mortar unit hastily knock-knocking on, the cars of freight trains heavily pounded along. 

It was a casual busy day and only I did nothing yet sweating in that blue shirt of acetate silk which is the same crap as nylon, just a little softer. 

I was sitting on the side of the entrance, so as not to accidentally obstruct the way to passing employees of the SMP-615.
Two locksmiths, the husbands of Lyda and Vita from our team, stopped by to ask why I was here and not at work.
Without explanations, I pointed with my thumb at the labor performance board of brown linoleum, placed on the same porch, but on the other side of the entrance.
And the chief mechanic himself guessed to read it.

Actually, that board was hung for life in the lobby on the first floor, next to the shut up window out of which once a month we received our payment.
And the board chastely kept the virginity of its linoleum, although a piece of chalk was put on its frame.

That day the board’s star time had stricken and out it went and stood there covered with the pompous handwriting from which, without any graphology, anyone could at once see a graphomaniac:

‘Our trade union boss is a liar!
Down with Slaushevsky!’

I knew if that had happened anywhere in England, young representatives from both factions of the Labor Party would have already been photographed next to the board, and the reporters of that same ‘Morning Star’ would have already interviewed me – where from such a militant intolerance towards the trade union leader?

Until that morning, I also had just sympathy for him. 

The foreman of carpenters, Anatoly Slaushevsky, had a pleasant appearance under the milky gray hair.
In Hollywood, he would easily have made a career in the line of a noble sheriff in various Westerns. 
But we also kept a noble look in a high esteem and Slaushevsky was year after year elected the chairman of the trade union committee of the SMP-615.
The position, mind you, was not paid, so he also lived on just one salary. 
Like everyone else.

And he thought that I would understand him, like everyone else, when he told me on the site that morning:
‘No go.’
‘How's that "no go"?' 
‘Just so that no go.’

Could he have supposed that he would get accosted with the defamatory name of ‘boss’, by white on brown, and attached demand of putting him in an unaccustomed position?

Sympathy is a short-living thing.

A month before I would readily give him a hug when he told me there was a permit to the Artek pioneer camp. 
Yes, I wanted it, sure thing!
All my pioneer childhood I dreamed of visiting the sunny Artek on the Crimean coast.
Now, I, naturally, did not fit there with my age anymore, but Lenochka would be happy to see the Black Sea. 

In fact, Lenochka got a little scared and began to ask her grandmother, who responded that Artek was very good.
And Lenochka had already passed all the doctors from the children polyclinic with their medical checks.
She even made her choice which suitcase she would take with her for keeping her things in Artek.

‘No go.’

A month before Slaushevsky did not yet know that someone else would guess that Artek was good.
That’s why he offered to me the permit paid for by the trade union.
And it did not matter that the smart late-comer, to whom some manager from the SMP-615 boasted about having such a permit, was from another organization.
Anyway, his position in his organization was higher than that of a bricklayer.

‘No go.’

If you live on just one salary, you must think rationally.
As everyone else.
Grunt, scratch in the back of your neck, say ‘fuck!’, and go to your workplace.
What’s the use of showing your horns to Slaushevsky?
He’s also like everyone else...

I knew how all that would evolve in England but I had no idea what would happen next here in my native country. 
So, my role was that of an on-looker in acetate silks, only I had to unbutton a couple of buttons, it was a too hot day.

Around the white-brick corner of the administrative building slowly came a white Volga.
It made a wide turnabout on the fine dust of the road surface and pulled up in front of the porch with its nose to where it had come from. 

The driver got out, leaving two passengers in the back seat, climbed the porch, read the two lines on the linoleum of the monthly labor performance board and, without looking at me, entered the building.

He soon returned, got back into the car and his two burly passengers came out of it and approached me.
‘Let’s go.’
‘Where?’
‘You’ll see.’

It’s inconvenient to talk turning your face up in two directions.
I got up and put my hand on the back of the chair.
‘Okay, I just take the chair back.’
‘They’ll take it without you.’
And each of them had already grabbed my biceps with both his hands – each one from his side.
Gently and slowly they led me to the Volga.

In the distant shade of the doorway to the production building, a monitoring group of two locksmiths and one welder stood watching. 
From the painting of Repin ‘The Arrest of a Propagandist'. 

The archangel on the left, seeing how obedient I was, loosened his grip a little.
He was already, like, strolling along with a comradely hold on my arm.
I shouted to the driver:
‘The left one is shirking!’
The grips got balanced and soon the three of us sit down in the back seat with me in the center.
Like the king on the coronation day.

While Svaytsikha was opening the gate – the first and last time I saw it locked – I shouted to her to take back from the porch the chair I had borrowed from her workplace.
And the Volga drove to Konotop.

After some other gate, they told me to get over into a small UAZ wan with no windows in the back. 
One of the burly guys got in with me.
Soon we stopped again.
Through the windshield in the driver cab, there were seen the poplars nearby the City Medical Center. 

After a prolonged wait, the back door swung open. 
On the sidewalk stood the psychiatrist Tarasenko.
‘Yes, it’s him.’
After those his words, the door slammed shut again and I was taken to Romny. 
Without any voluntariness on my part...

Your looks depend on how favorable to you feels the mirror you are looking in.
I had noticed it more than once.
In some mirror – wow! – I’m really gorgeous!
While in another – is that ghoul I?

The most in-love-with-me-mirror I had ever met, was the pier glass in the hall of the fifth unit of the regional psychiatric hospital in the city of Romny.
It showed me how much handsome a man I was, after all.
And without any cinematic sweetness – just a really comely man.

In those three months in Odessa, I looked like Konkin, or he was made up to look like me when starring in ‘The Meeting Place Cannot Be Changed’.
And it did not matter much, who’s like who, the main thing that there, from the pier glass, at me was looking a man of unusual for stereotyped standards handsomeness by Titian's brush.

The red pajamas with thin yellow stripes, brown soft hair slightly lightened with their sunburn, but the main advantage was the color of the eyes.
An unprecedented, inimitable color – that of a melting honey.

And let Captain Pissak, composing my verbal portrait in front of the ranks of the first company, say:
‘Look at his eyes! They are lynx’s eyes!’
But no, Captain, the pier glass would not lie – they were good!
The only pity was that no one saw it except me.

The hall was empty and the corridor was quiet. 
A dozen of patients stayed in the observation wardroom and all the rest of the fifth unit the entire daylight hours were kept– with the break for midday meal – on the Area.
It’s summer, after all!.

When, at the experimental unit of the Repair Work Shop of the KaPeVeRrZe Plant, we, at the end of the working day, were waiting until expired the most slow-go final half hour and, leaning back against the vices, were yakking of this and that, and, in general, of nothing, some younger locksmiths agreed that it would be nice to get back to the army again, but only now, when you already knew what’s what, and, well, not for the full stretch of two years, but, let’s say, a week, or two, or maybe for a month...

To me, then pre-conscript, such conversation seemed unconvincing, yet now I’m ready to agree, that the same phenomena might look different.
At the first sight through the roundly perplexed eyes things look one way, but when you watch them from the height of the accumulated experience, they acquire quite different looks.
And one month is a trifle.
The madhouse does not lock you up for less than forty-five days.

Forty-five days is half a season – half the summer, or half the spring, or wherever they put you there. 

As a regular of the fifth unit, I already knew that and some other nuances, however, I had not been there in summer.

For me, as an unmitigated recidivist, they no longer cared to spend expensive insulin.
That time I was not treated there, but getting punished with iminazine.

Three executions per day multiplied by forty-five.
I knew what mess they would do of my ass in the following half of the season.

And, as a cheaper patient, I was placed in a larger wardroom, number eight.
The more the number of sick people spending the night around, the higher chance of listening to their screams from nightmares, or witnessing a showdown under the light of inexorable electric bulbs. 

(...every summer has its minuses and, first of all, the influx.
Any resident of any resort would agree – on the arrival of those crowds, the standard of living takes a nosedive…)

In the summer, the fifth unit served, on average, 40 more patients than in other seasons.
To provide everyone with a place to sleep, in wardroom eight, for example, two side-by-side beds served to accommodate from three to four men a night, depending on how lucky you were.
In that half season, I was lucky both ways. 

But there was a huge ‘but!’ – the summer removed the problem of the washed and therefore locked toilet because we spent all day in the Area.

The Area was a square 40 by 40 meters.
The three sides of its perimeter, including the one in which the gate, were thick gray unpainted planks, vertically nailed side by side, 2.2 meters tall.
The fourth side was a large iron mesh 2 meters high from the ground.


Along the plank part of the fence lying in the base of the square, there stretched a thirty-meter canopy with its low gable roof of rusty tin propped by rare pillars of red brick.
Under the canopy, there was a high heap of broken iron beds. 
Two, still alive ones stood by the slope with a cloth blanket thrown over the springy mesh of each one.
When the syringes with midday injections were brought down to the Area, the patients, called by their names, were coming to the beds to pull their pants down, lie with their backs up, get their dosage into, one by one.

A pair of armchairs on rust-eaten legs, with their leatherette cover in tatters, were leaned, so as not to collapse, against the brick pillars – they were seats of paramedics.
At the far end of the canopy, near the mesh fence, there stood two or three short plywood benches with rigid backs like those of school desks.

Along the parallel plank fence over the square, three separate longboards were nailed to short logs sticking from the ground to form three consecutive backrest-less benches. 
Three benches of the same design stretched along the third plank fence with the gate in it.

The iron mesh fence opposite the gate had nothing by to sit upon, but near it—in the right upper corner of the Area—there stood toilet of the ‘sortier’ type: a box of three tin walls under equally rusty tin roof.
The door was missing for paramedics to be sure that the patient inside was not attempting a suicide and not allowing himself too much some other way.

The ground surface in the Area was bare and firm with an admixture of clay and dust trampled out of it. 

And that’s all?
No!

There were as many as two ‘but!’ – the strip of green, not trampled grass along the other side of the mesh fence and the summer sky with white clouds on top of everything and anything.

The sun was rising from behind the fifth unit building and the shadow thrown back by the roof started the inconspicuous movement from the iron mesh to the opposite plank fence.
While we were taken to the midday meal, the shadow passed over the fence and we did not find it anymore, and the sun in the sky was still steadily moving on – to the construction site of a one-story building, about six meters from the iron mesh fence, and even further over the site, until it disappeared altogether and the clearly delineated evening shadow started creeping up the wall of the fifth unit, right up to its roof, where it would dissolve in the dusk, which meant that now they would take us up to the unit for the end-day meal and overnight.
But before that, we all, of course, washed out feet in the vestibule on the first floor. 

All 120 people, in turn, would step, one after another, into one and the same tin basin filled with one and the same water.
Two halfwits, kneeling on the floor behind the basin, would wipe all their feet, in turn, with one and the same pair of wafer towels.
There was something of biblical air about the rite...

I met about ten familiar faces.
Tsyba, on the very first evening, hastily approached me in the corridor, gave a brief glance and turned away:
‘Eew! Not the same!’
And he never wanted to communicate with me anymore.

Sasha, who knew my brother Sasha, remained sporting close-cropped hair, but he was asleep all the time. 
In the morning, after our joyful piling in through the gate into the Area, he stretched on the bed for injections and only by the middle of the day drowsily gave part of it for laying, in turn, with back up, of those whose execution syringes had been brought down.

The first one and a half hour in the Area I usually spent laying on one of the board-benches along the plank fence. 
Behind it, there was the area of the fourth unit, where howling and squealing were as mighty as ours. 
Sometimes I had someone from the slightly inflated standing above me to mutter it was unfair to take up so much space for one person.
Then I had to lower my legs on the ground and sit up because I could not send him to the three board-benches along the plank fence with the gate in it – that was the grounds of the fully emancipated gymnosophists. 

They communicated with screams, being cooked in their own juice of a free life, inattentive that the skin of their bare bodies, getting sunburned day after day, was oozing with blood, which, eventually, got baked, though.

Now, the leader of the community where no one cared about anyone else, bored with the monotony of his swinging back and forth in a sitting position, issued a Tarzan howl and plunged for a couple of meters deep into the Area just to come back to the board-bench and go on with his swinging. 
Along the way, he just kicked a philosopher of the same ceramic-burned hue, squatting to get closer to the ground to draw with his finger in the dust below his hanging balls.
'Noli turbare circulos meos!' 

Next time he would knock down with one blow another naked neighbor from the bench who wouldn't even notice that concentratedly spinning between his fingers a sixteen-centimeter piece of a broken twig. 

The paramedics never intervened into the internal affairs on the benches of deep introverts as long as the howl-squeal-screaming in their free territories did not bypass the notch permissible level.
When it was transgressed, the paramedics assisted by volunteers from halfwits, or nuts would pull the completely raging from the board-benches and fix him on the second alive bed under the canopy.

When the heat drove me away from the Area, I sat down on one of the plywood benches ignored by the crazy public because of their inconvenient backrests.
Indeed, to sit through the whole day on a firm horizontal plane was not an easy task, in the evening you did not know which of your buttocks to use for sitting.

The Area itself was in the state of constant motion: back and forth, to and fro, circles, jerky tags…
Where to? What for?

At the plank fence behind the board-benches on which I was lying in the morning, lined a rank of sick replacing each other people stuck to the gaps between the nailed planks.
Someone giggled into the gap, another one beckoned a fellow patient, someone else jerked off in his pants because of the fourth unit, being at the same level of mental development, kept the patients of the opposite sex of all levels including the stark naked gymnosophisticated ones. 

These are just my assumptions, though, because I myself never approached the gaps in the fence and had seen only one of our neighboresses.

Black-haired and skinny, about thirty years old, she emerged waist-deep over the fence and with a gently waving movement of her arm threw a large flower into the dust under our feet.
The nuts kicked up a skirmish over her flower and she was pulled away from the other side of the fence, but the breasts were of a beautiful shape all the same.

Three times a day, to stretch the buttocks puffy from the shots, I left the shade of the canopy and walked around the Area in wide circles.
While promenading, I memorized by heart the lines of ‘The Novel in Pictures’ conceived by me yet in the wild but which had finally taken its shape already here.

The content did not exceed one page of text and it was important for me not to lose a single coma and prevent substitution of words with synonyms because I was arrested without a pencil and paper on me. 

One time, too deeply immersed in the punctuation of unwritten lines, I inadvertently crossed the invisible line along the board-benches of the absolutely free and two or three punches on the body and into my head brought me back to the surrounding reality...

I could not allow that reality to break my system of survival in the void.
So on Sundays, I went to the beach. 

I dragged two plywood benches out under the mesh fence—away from the free ones—and all day long was sunbathing, with breaks for the midday meal and when they called me come under the canopy and get my syringe into the ass. 

So I lay there all the day with my eyes closed under the hot sun, and the surrounding background noise accurately reproduced the shrieks and squeals of a crowded summer beach.

On admission to the fifth unit, instead of underpants, they gave me long johns with strips for tying them on the ankles. 
However hard I tried, I couldn’t roll them up above my knees.
I had to surrender in the end and at the plywood bench beach I pulled them off and wrapped my loins in the tank top.

One Sunday, the head doctor was on duty herself and got utterly shocked with the frivolity of my costume. 
‘And this is a person with a higher education!’ indignantly exclaimed she from under the canopy.

How did she figure out there was nothing under the tank shirt but me in the altogether? 
She was helped by the rhyme-riddle for kids about ‘A and B’ and the rule of thumb:
If the pajamas put under the head, and the blood smeared long johns on the back of the bench – what horn remained in the tank top? 

The day after she drenched the reputation of my past, I was approached by Tarattoon, from the new wave of the patients.
He invited me to collaborate in the creation of a nuclear bomb for which purpose they had already collected a good working group.
And I said, thank you, yet, said I, the task called for splitting nuclei and I had been fed up with even just a bare idea of breaking, breakers and so on and forth along the line.
He never repeated the invitation...

Among the paramedics there also popped up new faces.

The man of short stature with a beautiful head of crisp red hair and the broken right leg, for example.
Or maybe, it just was shorter, but he was heavily falling on that side.

The other one was a slender black-haired youth in an immaculately white medical coat. 
He was the only one to call me with the plural ‘You’ and planning to enter a medical institute in Leningrad.
In the meantime he gave me injections above my pulled down pants and long johns and—to comfort me—he kept complaining sympathetically that there simply no place remained to stab into, that’s why it’s bleeding so.

One evening, when we banzai-ing and hurrahing came back from the Area, that naked sunburned bodybuilder pressed all of his front (dirty with the dust stuck to his sweat) against the ‘manipulation room' in the hall by the observation wardroom. 
The youth paramedic, so as prevent stains on his snow-white medical coat, drove him away with high kicks of his black shiny shoes.
‘Just think of it! Now the door has to be washed!’
That moment I seemed to understand the naked introvert – to press your sun-smitten body to so a clean, coolness emanating door… even if locked… 

H.G. Wells wrote a novel ‘The Sleeper Awakes’.
The skinhead sleeper of Sasha woke up on the bed under the canopy and, without opening his eyes, pronounced:
‘What a ridiculous name he has – Tarattoon!’
A second later the paramedic's yells mingled with other noise in the Area. 

I turned my head.
Snapping the iron mesh, Tarattoon overcame its two-meter height and disappeared behind the nearby construction site.
The paramedic, falling on his right leg, ran up to the mesh, but had brains enough to figure out that even trying was of no use.
He doffed his medical coat, passed it to his partner paramedic and left.
Soon another paramedic came to fill his place in the tattered armchair. 

The Area was in excited state until the evening, they even stopped masturbating. 
Before the rite of feet washing, the redhead cripple entered the Area, pleased as an elephant,
He had caught that bastard!

We went up to the unit and some of us visited the sixth wardroom where Tarattoon was already lying on his bed, fixed and pacified with the shot of sulfur.
He was dragging on the cigarette butt which one of the halfwits kept in front of his lips and spoke softly.

He fled to the outskirts of the city and hid in the bushes of a deep ravine, no one had seen him there, there were no huttas around.
How could that red-haired bastard have found him at all?

(...and I felt melancholic sadness.
While they got stuck and making a muck out of schizophrenia with their monographs and insulin, what unimaginable horizons of incomprehensible human capabilities are unfolding around! 
How did the sleeping Sasha learn about Tarattoon’s break out a few seconds before it took place?
What led the redhead to the right ravine and that very bush behind which the fugitive had hidden? 

There is a lot of questions, I won't find the answer to. 
Never.
And others don’t care about them at all…)

This tall, emaciated, black-haired young man stood out among the representatives of the new wave,  with a normal expression of his thoughtful face, but he got easily aroused from mere words.
Once he started talking about some fascists who were ready to walk over dead bodies to reach their fascist ends.
I answered with a shrug:
‘The end justifies the means.' 
But he decided that was my way of justifying fascists and flared up immensely.
Still, I was not hit for the unthoughtful clue. 

Incidentally, he also was a construction worker and brought to the fifth unit at eight o’clock in the evening directly from the construction site.
‘Your team work two shifts?’
‘No, we finish at five, I went there just to plan work for the next day.’
Oh, my dear! Did you come to the workplace after five? 
They’re right – your place’s here!.

Ah! Yes!
There was also music in the Area! 
It was being made by a patient with a button accordion.
The repertoire comprised two or three songs:
‘Walking the Don river...’, ‘You’re a cop, I’m a thief...’ and… and that’s all, I think.

The performance of his pieces he began in the morning with the interval of an hour. 
The interval grew shorter and shorter and in the twilight, the numbers were already running one after another and again, and again. 
That way he achieved perfect virtuosity of performance, to which in the evening was also added singing without digressions out of tune.

With those two songs, the accordionist was bringing the Area to an ecstatically orgiastic state, transforming us into a single organism in the evening, where each organ did what it was supposed to do. 
Some sang along in chorus, others started up dancing, even the absolutely free under their ceramic sun-cracked tan began to squeak somehow in time.
I saw an elderly female paramedic, succumbing to the general ecstasy, she also danced and shouted in the circle of halfwits under a yellow light from a bulb in the summer twilight.
That’s not to say that such euphoria rolled over each evening, but it happened.

Then the accordion player was discharged, his forty-five-day stretch was over.
For two days something was missing for us.
But suddenly after a break for the midday meal, smiling with embarrassment, he again appeared in the gate. 
That morning he had put on his necktie and ventured to the city executive committee to point out to them their mistakes in managing affairs of the Romny city...

Ivan Corol, which means ‘king’ in English, would have remained quite normal but the name brought him to megalomania and here he was among us, one of us, but with royally conceited manners.

He was not patronizing the gaps in the fence to the fourth unit, he was a gourmet.
Louis le Roi Soleil.
He lay in ambush for the female plasterers from the nearby construction site to go out on the porch in their mortar splattered spetzovkas.
Then he entered the three-wall box of the tin toilet and staring through the holes in the tin, pierced with erratic nails, and commenced to hastily sweep his palm along his dick—back and forth—standing in profile to the rest of the courtiers in the Area.

And that’s an example for subjects?
On having it away he left the Versailles with the royal ceremonial, albeit exhausted gait.

One of the plasterers took a brush for whitewashing, put it on the porch and started to cut its end with an ax, like, to make it even, or maybe in retaliation. 
A man’s voice cut through the jungle cacophony in the Area:
‘Put a plank under! Making the ax blunt against concrete, you stupid!’
She dropped her jaw, never expecting instructions from that side.
She had thought there were only ceramic ones.
It’s just that I don’t like when they spoil instruments.
Probably, that's a hereditary trait. 

(...as yet, I have only outlined the external contours of the Area, the shell of it.
But what is its essence?
What is the point, if any, in all that chaotically turbulent movement or frozen motionless not giving a fuck for anything?
Does it exist?
Certainly, yes.

The boiling bouillon chaos of the soup from messy lightheaded ingredients and motionless vegetables on the bottom is nothing but a cross-section of the component parts and the current state of the human race. 
The question ‘how tasty is it?’ does not belong here.

So, without much ado, yet strictly to the point, inside the Area, the following five categories are easily distinguishable: 

a) normal, aka specialists, aka paramedics, aka bitches in white, aka etc., etc.;

b) not all there, aka with a phase shift, aka not the same, etc., etc.;

c) crazy, aka schizics, aka halfwits, etc., etc.;

d) nuts, loony, barking mad, etc., etc.;

e) bananas, aka departed, aka irrevocably free, aka etc., etc.

To begin with, you need clearly understand and keep in mind that the boundaries between the above categories are oscillating and overlapping – some medical workers, for instance, are distinguished from certain other forms from the following categories only by the color of the uniform. 
Secondly (and this is of prior importance!), the touchstone that allows for differentiation, is the possibility of using the individual in the interests of the current social formation, which creates those areas.
Such a formation must necessarily be current.

Now in order of appearance.
Those suffering from a ‘phase shift’ are distinguished from the normal ones by their inability always and under any conditions remain the same as everyone else.
Therefore, for all who are like everyone else, they are not all there.
Don Quixote, for example, who was not all home would perfectly fit into the ranks of the normal in the previous formation, where he would be like everyone else. 

Schizics, those incomprehensible geniuses, invent theories of relativity, probability, etc., or write the novel ‘Finnigan's Wake' in the aftermath of which the normal are necessitated to pretend they have understood the slightest bit of crap in all that theories or literary works. 
So, if you try to push forward your crazy ideas without having the appropriate diploma – welcome to the fifth unit!
The hospitable Area is waiting for you!

Nuts are not able to intelligibly expound the logic of their actions, however, having a musculoskeletal apparatus sufficient to move weights, and the ability to reproduce, they are the backbone of any formation.
It’s only that from time to time they must have their ass kicked so that those sancho panzas wiped the drivel off their gaping muzzles and would not cross the street to red.

The Tarzan-like roaring departed, who has achieved absolute freedom from the conventions of morality and behavior patterns of human species, will easily become their own in the family of brown bears, or in the lost link between the ape and human herds, but the present normal have no application for his qualities.

Yes, but why shall we need each other?
What could the normal have to do with the absolutely free?

Let’s don’t forget the mobility and overlapping of the categories, before reaching the absolute the departed had been start-ups within the lower leagues.
Besides, some of the normal (or else exceptionally gifted pretenders) could still harbor hope for a return of the departed ones out of the rough. 

‘Shine! Shine on!
You, crazy diamond!’

Don’t get scared, partner! They can’t catch up!
They cannot climb up to the shining peaks of your absolute freedom…

What category am I personally from?
By the method of excluding the superfluous, I irrefutably find myself not all there.
After all, no normal one would allow themselves the luxury of a hearty laugh when all alone and there is no ‘Comedy Club’ on the TV.

Besides, I hear voices in my dreams, I will not hide.
I sleep, and they read to me—in such a detached tone—pieces of prose.
Well-built passages of decent enough prose, which I will never write, looking like a screenplay for a Hollywood movie.
The voice gets replaced with visual illustrations, and when there is a change in the storyline, it starts to mumble again. 
I don’t like these voices, they interfere with sleep, but I don’t know how to turn them off.

Belonging to the departed is excluded because of my disgust for impurities; physical and other.

Well, I do not have the IQ to place myself among the geniuses.
I have not been tested but I know for sure it won’t be enough for the category.

In the course of life, you naturally have to zip in any of the categories because each of us is just a drop in the streams of the current formation.
Sometimes the current gives me over to a stream to drag along the rapids, then happens I’m kicking back in the languid backwaters.
That’s what about my letter, actually, is, to which (and for a long time already) it’s time to come back…)

Everything returns to normal and in forty-five days I returned to our team.
Two months later, the buttock also returned to their normal form.
Body is fluid.

It's only that walking along the Settlement streets, where, in the dusty potholes of the future pools, there lay piles of fallen apples taken out with pails from the gardens and dumped in the road, I got wistful that somehow everything rolled on without me. 

‘So the summer past,
As if it had never happened...' 

At 13 Decemberists appeared Guena, the husband of my sister Natasha.

He was a representative of a well-to-do layer in the population.
His mother, Natalya Savelyevna, with her face and blue eyes was like a movie star from the Mosfilm, but she worked in the Station restaurant, from where she returned every evening with bags of food.

Her husband, Anatoly Efymovich, had already retired, kept shouting at everybody and swallowing his medicines – an unmistakable specimen of the managing stratum. 

The newlywed still did not get along with the husband’s parents, but there’s a time for everything.

Yes, I missed the wedding, but every cloud has a silver lining and Lenochka had gone all the way to ‘Artek’.
It turned out well despite the pessimistic forecast of Slaushevsky.
Besides, all came off so cheap, I did not pay a kopeck, the expenditures for recreational facilities in our country were traditionally met by trade unions.

Did Lenochka meet her mother Olga?
After all, Theodosia was also in the Crimea.
I do not know.
I never learned to ask the most elementary, simple questions...

The newlyweds returned to live with the Guena's parents and, as the wedding present, I built in their hutta yard the walls for garage and summer kitchen in one shed. 
Well, there were still partitions in the bathroom inside the hutta.
Just so trifles...

The mail brought for me to 13 Decemberists was put on the handmade shelves, next to the photograph of Eera. 
She stood in the summer stream during the pioneer practice near the town of Kozelsk, in the north of Chernigov region, in black sports pants rolled up above her knees and smiled from under the plastic visor of a light kerchief. 

My mail was the same thick magazine „Vsesvit“ brought once a month.
I opened it and, squinting, sniffed somewhere from the middle – I always liked the smell of fresh print ink.

However, this time there was nothing to smell, it was an envelope which I disliked at first sight.
It looked like having been ripped open with a kitchen knife and then, in fright, they glued it back pouring, just in case, twice as much glue as needed on top of everything. 
Here at once and clearly the hand of a layman was felt, a test of the pen of the younger generation. 

I opened the envelope from the side, but I still had to tear off a piece of paper stuck with glue, sacrificing pieces of typewritten text.

'What is it, Seryozha?' my mother asked anxiously. 
'Did Lenochka not tell you?' 
'No.' 
'She will then.' 

It was a summons to the local people's court over the lawsuit of a resident of Nezhin, the citizen Eera, to dissolve the marriage since the family, in fact, never existed and I was regularly taken to psychiatric hospitals diagnosed with schizophrenia... 

In the queue for the soon-to-be divorcees on the second floor of the people's court, I was the second, after a couple of local ample divorcees.
They looked like a pair of fluffed-up dove-pigeons, absolutely not talking to each other, and each one painstakingly looked the other way.

A girl, a little over the age of twenty, invited them to enter for the procedure.
For several minutes from behind the door, there was heard a dialogue of varying loudness but of the same illegibility.
Then the couple went out of the door, still not looking at each other, but already of blushy complexion, as if after a steam room in the bathhouse. 
One after another—the man first—they left...

In the room looking like a corridor, two tables formed the letter 'T'. 
The judge was in the center of the crossbar table with two lay judges – one for each side.
They were a thirty-year-old fair-haired man of a military uprightness and a woman over her forties who had let go all of it at all. 
The girl-clerk was sitting at the second table where it adjoined the upper one. 

I liked the judge at once – a handsome man about thirty-five and he looked like judges from Westerns. 
His jacket was off and he even opened a pair of top buttons on his waistcoat – an embodiment of Western democracy.

I decided to play along with him and, sitting on a chair a meter from the bottom table assumed the air of a kicking back cowboy – the left leg stretched out with its heel against the floor, and the right heel resting over the left foot.

'Get seated as you should! Don't get it where you are?' barked the fair-haired.
'If you demonstrate how to sit at attention, I'll be happy to ape you, comrade lance-corpo..' 
'Well, okay!' intervened the judge. 'Let him sit as he likes.'

Then he read up the lawsuit of the citizen of Eera about the absence of a family and my diagnosis.
He finished and addressed me:
'What can you say in this respect?'

'My wife is always right. Each word of hers is the holy, purest truth.'
The girl-clerk wrote down that not only the Ceaser's wife could be beyond any suspicion. 

The judge used his home-made trump with which he apparently had started up and pumped the previous pair of divorcees: 
'But was there not anything really good in your marriage?'
'Why not? We were the sexiest lovers of the institute.'
With a sidelong glance at the innocent blush of the girl-clerk, the judge announced that was enough and the court needn't any more evidence.

Thus was dissolved my wedlock with Eera.





