~~~ The Married Life ~~~

The SMP-615, aka Construction and Installation Train of the same number, was located about where I once chewed grass half-starved in the bicycle trip to the Seim river, only on the other side of the road.
At the time of my grazing experience, Konotop had not reached that place yet, but the city grew and the location became a part of the city district named ‘In-Seven-Winds'. 
Konotopers never needed to borrow a poetic vision of the world. 

At the beginning of December 1979, after a brief visit to a suburb area of Chernigov, I came to the SMP-615, because no tramway or bus routes were reaching there, it was as far as the hell itself, on the border of the In-Seven-Winds.
During the interview with the head of the personnel department, he made me faces a la Slavik Aksyanov. 
At some point, he even grabbed a wide wooden ruler from his desk and covered his left eye with it.
Afraid to jinx me?

The distortions hardly were caused by a hangover because I came there in the second half of the working day.
Just one of the things you have to dismiss with a shrug and forget.
Anyway, he provided me with a job at the organization, which as he explained, levied 10% of the apartments built by them to distribute among the SMP-615 workers according to the established line of those waiting for improvement of their housing conditions.
At the moment, the construction of 110 apartment block was underway with 23 people in the mentioned line.

I handed in the application and became 24th in the line.
Even the fact, that after the delivery of the 110-department block I was to become the 13th in the line did not scare me off.
Because in the next one or two blocks I would definitely get an apartment for my family.

I did not know then that not everything was as straightforward.
And the head of the personnel department did not have time to explain me the details and nuances because he changed his place of work.
The position was embraced by a retired army officer.
With the new personnel department head, everything was clear and subordinate since retired Major Petukhov kept under control his countenance. 

However, the facial expressions of the personnel department heads are not of much importance because the main people in my life for the next six years became the team of bricklayers.
In the SMP-615 there was only one team of bricklayers, all the rest – plasterers, welders, carpenters, plumbers came to the erected objects after us.

The workforce at the mortar-concrete unit, crane operators, laborers was an auxiliary layer. 
Even the engineers and accountants remained secondary when compared to us.
It was we who came to the deep foundation pits to fill them with installed multi-tonnage concrete blocks with the assistance of the truck crane operator Gavkalov.
Then the epic of growth of the building walls and ‘filling’ followed in cooperation with the tower crane operated by Mykola, Kolya, and Vitalya.

The crane operators replaced each other, welders changed, but we stayed and withstood, for who else, if not we, would transform the space?
In place of an air-filled void for coasting crows, stair flights marched up along which the tenants are till now climbing up to their homes on the heights of previously unattainable altitudes.
The idle crows had to reconsider their routes.

Of course, multi-apartment houses resulted from the work of all the above listed, as well as not mentioned structures and units of the SMP, but we, the bricklayers, were the arrowhead in the advancement towards the realization of the everlasting dream of mankind about normal living conditions.

It’s not easy to be the arrowhead.
Neither the walls of the offices, nor the glass of the cabins, nor the boards of the hulls hide you from whims of calamitous weather.
All your protection – a spetzovka, a cap, and boots, in the winter a pea jacket and a hat will be added, any part of you not covered with them becomes a prey to the scorching sun, whipping rains, ruthless whirlwinds, and merciless frosts. 
Not everyone will stand, not everyone will bear to remain a bricklayer day after day.

I have worked with lots of different people both in the SMP-615 and beyond it, but these twelve will forever remain for me ‘our team': 
Mykola Khizhnyak – the foreman;
two Peters—Lysoon and Kyrpa—bricklayers;
two Gregories—Gregoryevich and just Grynya, handled Melekhov (after the serial of the ‘Quiet Flows the Don' on the central television)—bricklayers; 
two Andreyevnas—Lyubov and Anna—bricklayers; 
Lyda and Vitta—bricklayers;
Vera Sharapova and Katerina—riggers;
Sehrguey Ogoltsoff—a bricklayer.

In Konotop it's easy to see the apartment block built by our team from other buildings because of ours are striped. 
Starting the walls of a floor, we laid the perimeter belt of red brick (6x12x25cm) courses.
The mark ‘KK’ on the brick stretcher stood for ‘Konotop Brick’, instead of ‘Factory’ there followed ‘I’, or ‘II’ or ‘III’ showing at which shift was it produced.

When the belt courses reached the height of windowsills we switched to laying the pillars between the windows of white silicate bricks (9x12x25cm) of unmarked origin.
The pillars were bridged with concrete cross-pieces delivered up by the tower crane.
The final courses over the cross-pieces were also of red bricks.
Now, looking from aside, another floor was ready (red-white-red), yet now all goes as swiftly as a fairy tale is told… 

It's time to start the ‘filling', to raise the inner walls – the load-bearing axial one, aka ‘the capital', and the transverse ones partitioning the blocks of different entrances and one apartment from another within the same block. 
The partitions between the rooms and corridors in an apartment were laid of gypsum plates (8x40x80cm).
The toilet-bathroom compartments were also of red bricks (and only red because silicate ones, like gypsum, do not withhold moisture) laid shiner-way.

Only then the floor can be bridged over with the concrete slabs delivered by the tower crane on four tight steel cables which the riggers Katerina and Vera Sharapova hooked from the stacks on the ground.
Each slab has four iron loops for the hooks, each slab's length is 5.6 meter, but the width may vary, it's one meter or 1.2 meters. 

The difference in slabs’ width is dictated by the need to fit them accurately between the staircase walls of different entrances because a slab should not overlap the staircase wall in which the kitchen ventilation ducts are laid out.

And if the slabs brought to the site are all of the same widths?

(...the era of planned economy and deficits taught not to be too picky – take what turns up, while at least that is available…)

And now in the slab stacks around the site, there is nothing to choose from, what then? 
It’s also no problem!
There is a breaker, a sled hammer, two Peters, two Gregories, one Seryoga and the foreman Mykola – passing each other the tool, they will bring the slab to the needed width. 

Bridging the floor is a crucial moment, my first year in the team I was not honored with that responsibility.

The crane puts the slab onto two load-bearing walls: the outer and the axial (the capital) ones,  bridging them.
The foreman together with a trusted bricklayer lay down with their stomachs across the slab and hang their heads below it to check how it fits in the series of the previously installed ones because the slabs' concrete bellies would be the ceiling in the apartment. 
If needed, the crane would take the slab up and aside for mortar to be added onto a wall, or maybe scraped off.
After all, we build for people who will come to live here!

Finally, the exacting peeps of two hanging heads are satisfied with how the slab fits the evenness of the bridging and the foreman cries out the long-awaited words:
‘They’ll eat it up!’
Which means the future tenants would be happy with the quality of the construction works in their homes.

The crane relaxes the taut cables, the hooks are released from the holes with loops on both ends of the installed slab. 
The crane boom rises and turns aside, carrying away its huge block with the massive hook from which hang the four slings with four smaller hooks on their ends – the so-called ‘spider'. 

With the rumble and din of its open-work iron tower, the crane rolls along the crane track to the slab stack on top of which Katerina and Vera Sharapova are waiting all ready to pull the ‘spider's' hooks through the loops in the next slab holes. 
The technology has been verified by the decades of application...

In the morning at half past seven the workforce of the SMP-615 gathered at the station square waiting for their colleagues to arrive by the first local train arriving through Bachmach, Khalimonovo, Khutor Khalimonovo and Kukolka stations and come up in the stream of the passengers flowing around the corner of the mighty two-story building of the Konotop railway station. 
And then, all together, we started to wait for our bus.

We formed a wide circle, not for a dance but for idling the time exchanging the news, jokes or just looking around to make comments on the life in the station square. 
There was practically no traffic in it and only other circles from other organizations, but ours was the widest and jolliest. 

(…in a circle the is something of a family, the incipient rudiments of a community.
Standing in a circle you see more human faces than when lined-up in the ranks…)

Finally, from the Club Street our bus appeared, our ‘seagull’, handled so after the ‘Seagull’ brand cars meeting the government delegations at Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow.

It slowly crossed the tram tracks and passed the one-story structure of the railway militia station in the corner of the square then under the taxi stop sign on the lamp pillar, though, for some reason, no taxi ever appeared under it.
At the end of its triumphal circling around the square, the bus would stop next to our jolly circle and slam its automatic doors open. 

From the square the bus would take us past the the Loony, past School 12, past the tramway depot, to the In-Seven-Winds, where our team would get off near the 110-apartment block site and the bus would go further, for another half a kilometer or so, taking the rest of its passengers to the vast grounds of the SMP-615 bordered by the white brick wall.
However, not all of our team workers came by the ‘seagull’, most of them lived in the 50-apartment block or in the hostel barracks, also the In-Seven-Winds, and they arrived on foot.

We changed clothes in the trailer made of long horizontal boards painted brown.
One half of the tiny vestibule was filled with a bunch of dead-mortar crust-covered shovels leaning against the wall over the dented tin pails out of which stuck the handles of our trowels and hammers and hanged coils of the plumb bob whitish line lengths.
The inner door of the vestibule opened to a low room with one window and two sets of narrow lockers in its both ends.
Most of the room was occupied with the box of asbestos-cement plates covering electric entrails of the heater.

The team women dressed in the trailer of the oversees.
Unlike ours, it had big wheels which called for the high front porch under its door.
The oversees’ trailer had tin siding and two windows because there were two compartments in it – one for the current oversee and plumb bunches of the blueprint drawings of the object in progress, and the other for the team women.

At night two pensioner-watchmen, alternately, slept in the oversees’ compartment.
One of them, by the brave name of Rogov, wore a pesha tunic with order-and-medal straps, an officer's belt, riding breeches and boots of chrome leather, and on his head a khaki cloth cap in the fashion of the 30's, like that of Marshal Zhukov when he was still a brigade commander. 
From under the long cloth, visor looked the face of a veteran Roman legionary, worn out in campaigns and full of resentment at the head of Konotop pension fund.
The sentiment rooted in the accidentally overheard words of that public service worker addressed to his deputy concerning Rogov on a visit to their office.
‘Patience, colleague, they’re not already so too many around.’

The second watchman was dressed in civilian clothes, but earlier he wore the uniform of a militiaman and arranged sadistic tests for tipsy mujiks: if they could pronounce the words ‘Jawaharlal Nehru' he would let them go, otherwise, they were taken to the sobering-up station. 

(...Konotop is Konotop and there even a mere militiaman knows the name of the first president of India…)

When on his turn, the former militiaman sealed the window in the oversees’ compartment with a sheet of cardboard from within.
Otherwise, he could not fall asleep. 
In his youth, he served in the troops fighting Bandera men and the windows in their barracks were closed for the night with shields of thick planks so that the repose of servicemen would not be disturbed with guerrillas grenades through the window glass... 

After donning the spetzovka robes, the entire team collected to the men bricklayers trailer to exchange the news of the In-Seven-Winds, the hostel barracks, and the SMP-615 itself. 
Yes, sometimes Gregory Gregorovich would start bulldozing Grinya that at 8.00 he should stand at the line, chink his trowel and lay a brick upon another.
Then Grinya grunted with a chuckle and answered:
‘Very truly!’
Until the mortar was brought to the site and hauled by the crane to the line, bricklayers had nothing to do there.

The mortar was brought to the site by a dump truck.
It would reverse over the rows of empty sheet-iron boxes and raise its dump for the mortar to crawl down the steep slope, but it would not drop into the boxes completely. 
And it’s a good news if at least half of it fell out of the dump.

Firstly, on the way from the mortar-concrete unit, the mortar had grown dense squeezing water out from the solution and it was that water to fall down into the boxes on the ground.
And secondly, the dump floor and sides are not smooth anymore, but covered with the growing crust of frozen upon frozen upon frozen mortar from the previous deliveries.

That's why it's necessary to climb the tailgate hanging off. 
It would swing under your foot in its hinges.
The other foot should be rested on the dump side for the stability. 
Now cut the dense mortar with your shovel so that it slides into a heap over the boxes.
When the cut-off layer of mortar pours in the boxes the truck dump would give a vigorous jerk-and-quake when relieved of the load. 
Keeping your balance at this point is of vital importance.  

The dump truck would go leaving behind a hillock of mortar on 4 or 5 boxes.
But that’s wrong because each bricklayer is supposed to have a separate box
Katerina and Vera Sharapova restore the justice with their shovels.

Although each box has four hook loops in its structure yet the riggers hook the boxes by only two, diagonally, so that the crane would haul the mortar for two bricklayers in one go. 

The part of the wall that’s being laid by team is called ‘the seizure’.
A string, aka the shnoorka, is stretched from end to end of the seizure. 
Shnoorka is a thick fishing line smeared at places with stuck dry mortar, tied in knots where a strike of an incautious trowel had cut it, giving rise to reproving exclamations from among the bricklayers: 
‘What bastard again?’
The shnoorka is the tool for maintaining the right direction and level of the course of bricks. 

To the right of a bricklayer, the crane leaves a box, aka banka, with a load of mortar. 
The boxful of mortar is not exceedingly large – just a quarter of a ton. 
When it’s over the crane takes the banka-box to the riggers for refilling from the remaining heap of mortar.

When the boxed mortar loses its elasticity, simply add water brought in a crumpled pail from the multi-ton container put nearby behind the line and mix it with the shovel.
That’s why a shovel handle sticks out from each box.

However, the main purpose of the shovel is to put the mortar from the box onto your part of the seizure.
Then the shovel returns to its sticking position in the box and the bricklayer spreads the mortar brought onto the wall with the trowel which is the size of a large kitchen knife only with a triangular spade instead of the blade.

To the left of a bricklayer, there's put a pallet of bricks, 3-4 hundred pieces, stacked in dense rows on top of each other. 
Snatching a brick from the upper row, a bricklayer lays it upon the spread mortar and tap-taps with the tin-clad end of the trowel handle, to level with the line of the stretched shnoorka.

When laying the course calls for a bond with a brick of special size—a half, a three-quarter, or, the smallest, a one-fourth piece—a bricklayer’s hammer is put to use for cutting off the excess.
With the bricks on the pallet finished off the crane operator delivers another one hooked by Katerina and Vera Sharapova from among the of pallets stacked on the ground.

The rhythmic change of linked movements – bending, stretching, tilting, knocking – turns the labor process, taking into account its outdoor nature, into a real aerobics sprinkled with a pinch of weightlifting.
Looped motion, consistently ordered, you could even call it spiraling.
Do you follow?

And now spit in the eye of that pathetic bullshit and forget it, because the construction site is not a circus with evenly smoothed sand in its arena.

The construction site is a dangerous zone, where protruding pieces of rebar ambush in half-dark nooks, a seemingly firm board breaks off under the foot, and a pail of boiling tar falls from the roof and lucky you if the warning yell ‘run!' makes you jump aside without gaping up: what's there? 

It is the place, where a cast-iron radiator of heating hits the ground by the wall hurled from a window on the fourth floor by a recidivist that recently returned to live among people after another stretch at the zone. 
He did not aim at anyone in person and threw it just so without even looking out, to check who God would send it on. 
On the whole, the construction site could be compared to life itself and there, as in life, one must not only live but also survive. 
Excuse for falling back into the pathetic rut. 
Still, it’s worth mentioning that the bricklayers are not robots but mere humans.
And humans, being cornered properly enough, would take your dear life to save the life of theirs…
That is… er… what I was about?. 
Ah, yes! The construction site.

At the construction site, there's no time for a bricklayer to plunge into interpretations of esoteric messages from the initiated to the chosen, neither for the deciphering of signs drawn by the motion of ever-changing clouds. 
Wait for a smoke break and then play with symbol-shuffling at your heart content. 
Until the foreman Mykola would rise the shnoorka for the following course and yell along the seizure line: 
‘Off we drive!’
And Peter Lysoon would respond:
‘What? To attack again? And which direction is your ‘forward’?
And that means – grab your shovel and start to live on.

(...a couple of centuries before, on the border with England, or maybe, conversely, with Scotland, there lived a farmer earning plenty of dough without any charlatanism whatsoever.
His specialty was those mentally crazed. 
On the condition that their loving relatives were not around at the time of treatment.
So, they brought to him such, say, a challenged, who had already drilled into the brains of all of his household members with his special vision of the world in which he was a teapot.
‘Oh, look out! I’m of porcelain! Don’t break me up!’
And the following morning the farmer would take the teapot out into a field together with odd items from other services – crystal wine glasses, or saltcellars with their lids lost, and, occasionally, costume jewelry turned up as well – and carefully harnessed the whole company into the plow. 
And then, of course, plowed the field.

By the evening of the day, 88% of the glass containers recollected their origin and made comments on his mistakes in attitude towards human beings.
On the second day, the most stubborn pressure cookers began to pretend being human too and the farmer returned to the family and society their fully restored members.
For the stipulated fee, sure thing, plus bonus of the field cultivated by unpaid workforce…)

Eera did not believe in labor therapy in the open air, she had more confidence in folk remedies.
That winter she took me to to the sorcerer in the district center of Ichnya of the Chernigov region.
We arrived there in the evening amid the early thickening winter twilight.
There was about half an hour before the bus departure back and the local kids, with some kind of pride, directed us to the sorcerer’s hutta.

The door was opened by a common-looking rural woman.
In the kitchen there was a pair of visitors, but not from our bus, I would have remembered them.
Maybe from the neighborhood.
A young couple with the appearance of the newlywed.
Both were seated, the man busy with eating borsch, and she, like overseeing. 
Not quite the right time for borsch consuming, but I did not intervene – maybe the sorcerer prescribed the medication.

The woman led Eera to the next room and two minutes later they came back together with the sorcerer.
A black-haired man about fifty in a khaki shirt from an army parade crap.
We looked at each other unblinkingly and he returned to his room with Eera.
I stayed with the borsch-eater and the two women.
Soon Eera came back all excited and we left for the bus.

On our way to Nezhin, Eera shared that I was the way I was because they fed a ‘giving’ to me, and there occurred an overdose,  but it was useless to treat me on that very day since it was a wrong ‘quarter’, that is the moon was not in the right phase.
(Or could they run out of the borsch?)
The sorcerer said I did not need to come on a visit anymore and should be represented by a blood relative. 
So, instead of me, my sister Natasha a couple of times went with Eera to the district center of Ichnya.

(...it’s a commonplace knowledge that a ‘giving’ is a love potion used by a female to make you fall in love with her.
The target of the charm is treated to something edible spiced with a bit of her menstrual bleeding.
Anyway, it was the fair sex to start experiments of human beings…)

I have no trust in any charms, or spells and so on, but when you chink your trowel on a brick or turn the mortar with the shovel, your head remains basically free and lots of things can slowly twirl in there. 

(...if, purely hypothetically, suppose that the ‘giving' had, after all, taken place, then – who, where, when? 
I do not remember in which of the years of my work at the SMP-615, two assumptions turned up in my head:
1) the sore milk, which Maria brought for me when I was treated in the Nezhin city hospital for the principle’s sake;
2) the boiled sausage I was fed with by my course-mate Valya with black eyebrows meeting on her nose bridge during our joint school practice at the station of Nosovka, although I was not really hungry. 

However, since I had not fallen in love with any of them, the hypothesis fails miserably, the Ichnya sorcerer gets zero points and remains on the bench of charlatans…)

When Gaina Mikhailovna, lowering her eyes asked carefully what attitude they had towards me, in our team, I could easily see what wind she was trimming her sails to. 
That meant – how do they tolerate my wet reputation?

Yes, it should be admitted that not every collective would accept in its ranks someone with higher education for a position not corresponding to their diploma.
Here lies the explanation to the yell from the bottom of Vasya’s heart, the fastener at the New Dophinovka mine:
‘You disgrace our mine with your diploma!’
That is, – ‘you turn it into some worthless rabble’.

My reputation at the SMP-615 was spoiled by the cashier Komos.
She knew that I studied in Nezhin and got the diploma.
Her daughter Alla once had a long, serious relationship with my brother Sasha, I even visited the Komoses in their apartment during that period. 
But later Alla cut her marvelous long hair too short, and my brother became the Acceptee to Lyuda with her mother... 

The cashier Komos gave us our payment.
For that event, our ‘seagull' bus was taking the workers from the construction sites to the SMP-615 base grounds and in the lobby on the first floor of the administrative building we lined to the small square window in the wall. 
The payment was given after standing in the excited line of workmen, then bending and putting your head into the opening of the window low in the wall and signing the paysheet.
I just did not like that final position.
Your head is somewhere there, not quite clear where, and the back sticks out to the mercy and at the discretion of the excited line...

When I reached the window, I did not bent, but simply pulled the sheet closer—on the window ledge—and signed it.
Moreover, since Komos saw that it was I who came up.
Then she cried out from behind the glass:
‘Seryozha! And where is the head?’
‘I was guillotined.’
‘What? Don’t show off! Having a diploma does not make you above anything else! You’ve come to visit us with your Olga. And we have drunk moonshine together!’

One thing that I do not like is a self-indulgent familiarity.
That’s why I gave Komos the cashier a direct reply:
‘You are wrong! At your place, we drank birch sap and medical alcohol, and there was no moonshine at all!' 

In general, put her to the place where she belonged. 
But she still gave me my payment and there was enough to return Tonya the 25 rubles that she lent me for flowers when you were at the maternal hospital.
Till then it somehow did not work out at all to collect the sum.

In general, because of the talkative cheek of the cashier, I never managed to hide from our team the fact of my diploma.
However, they did not apply any special discrimination because of it, and after about four years I even screwed up on my spetzovka jacket the ‘float-badge', of those that they hand out along with your diploma.
I just thought: why should it kick off in the sideboard?
So I took it and screwed up.
In the summer, naturally.

It had a pretty look – a rhomboid badge of tender blue enamel with a golden book in it on the sunburnt black cotton of my spetzovka jacket. 
For more than a month I walked around the site with it.
And then one morning I opened the locker – the spetzovka hung in its place but the badge had gone, only the hole remained in the jacket.
But that was not by ours, then a lot of people were sent to the site for the accomplishment period...

So, on my next visit to Nezhin I gave my mother-in-law a quite predictable answer:
‘Gaina Mikhailovna, ten people from our team have a good attitude to me, and one person entertains a positive one.’
‘How do you know?’
‘I conducted the survey. Oral, and separately, of course.’
‘And how did you ask: “What’s your attitude to me?”’

(...an interesting question, eh?
Where else would I get those figures from?
By the way, one of the asked then also asked:
‘And what’s your attitude to me?’…)

Yes, life turned upside down: I had been used to go from Nezhin to Konotop on weekends, but now from Konotop to Nezhin.

On Fridays after work by a local train to Nezhin; on Mondays by 6.00 train to Konotop.
Three times I overslept that 6.00 local and started to go back in the evening on Sundays.
I was afraid that being late would affect my place in the queue for an apartment.

(...when there was Negro slavery in America, some of the Afro-American families were divided.
Say, the husband was slavering on the plantation of one master and his wife was several miles away on the plantation of another one.
On holidays her husband was visiting her.
Such a woman was called his ‘broad wife’.
When I learned that I regretted that I knew English so deeply it scratched me, I don’t know why, but I got really upset...)
