
Because there were no trams in Nezhin the passenger buses became overly stuck-up. 
The tin plates on special posts at every bus stop were telling with black on yellow at what exactly time bus number this or that should pull up by but reading those plates would only aggravate frustration. 

According to the tin-table, no less than three Bus 5 should have already passed the stop while you were still waiting for at least a single one. 
At last! It appeared in the distance instilling hope that …
No, it passed by without stopping because was jam-packed to the utmost...

However, that night Eera and I were lucky.
The moment we reached the bus stop it was approached by a bus. 
It was a Saturday night and we walked out because Twoic invited me to play Preferans at his place.

He was already a last-year student and did not live in the hostel but renting a flat somewhere, so we arranged to meet at the main square.
From the Red Partisans street to the main square there were just two bus stops and we would go on foot but for that bus turned up.
Eera would hold on to my arm, so as not to slip in her high wedge boots on the firmly trampled snow with bright white circles on it in the cones of light under the lamp pillars. 

When we were dressing in the bedroom, Eera asked me to pass her the belt from her frock – a long strap of fabric.
Because the bedroom was so narrow and I did not want to squeeze between the bed and your carriage, I just threw the belt to her.
However, one of its ends I kept in my hand in case she did not catch it.
Eera, not following my actions after her request, bent down to zip up her boots and the other end of the belt swept over her bowed back.

I was astonished how exactly that moment replicated the frame in ‘The Gypsy’ movie when Budulie hit his wife with a whip going away to the war.
However, Eera had not noticed anything and I consoled myself with the thought that I was not a gypsy and it was not a war anyway. 

When the bus pulled up on the square, there had already accumulated such a crowd at the stop that even two buses would not be enough.

I got off first and stretched out my hand to Eera to help her go down.
No sooner had she been on the stop than the crowd rushed to storm the bus doors.
However, I managed to fence Eera behind my back.
And then some girl shrieked out, almost getting run over in the stampede.
The last moment she grabbed onto the bus door and did not fall under the crowd pouring up the steps.

As a man not only noble but also gallant, I thought it was absolutely wrong, especially in the presence of my wife, and I shouted to the girl over the mass streaming between us apologizing for all that: 
‘I am sorry!’
Someone in the crowd did not want to be inferior in gallantry to me and, concluding it was I who pushed her, hit me on the cheekbone. 
Or maybe he knew that a fact of violation must be followed by a fact of punishment. 

And then I pronounced loudly—and the crowd around seemed for a moment forgot about the bus and turned back to my response and even the full moon stood still to hear the words: 
‘With all my nonresistance I cannot bear that!’
And I responded with a blow to the blow.

Probably, he was not alone there, or the guys from the embittered crowd had at once turned into a close-knit pack, but there poured blows at me from all the sides – they found a scapegoat to splash out their wrath because of the life injustice. 

All I could do was to cover my face and head with my arms bent in elbows, but, in my opinion, the protective stance was executed by my body itself, without my participation.
I, personally, only could hear some unintelligible yells.
Who to whom?
What about?

When there sounded the growling of the started engine, I somehow was already on the other side from the bus in the cross-light of the street lamps surrounding the square, but still on my feet, although bareheaded. 
Probably, there were too many of the enraged and they hindered each other to knock me down on the flatten out snow of the square.
The pack ran off to catch the door from slamming on the other side.

The bus left and I returned to the stop, where, among a dozen of passengers who had not managed to squeeze in, Eera stood with my rabbit fur hat in her hands. 
Further on, in the shadow of the dark news stall there loomed Twoic who had come to meet us...

He took us to his flat which he rented together with Petyunya Rafalofsky and I played one pool with them.
Then they went out to see off Eera and me.

The narrow sidewalk allowed for only two persons to go along side by side and Eera was in the first pair walking together with Twoic.
He wore a long sheepskin coat and a furry hat-malakhai giving him a look of a bear beside Eera in a coat of straight cut and closely fitting knitted hat.
I was walking behind with Petyunya and felt unbearable bitterness because she was not with me.
But what could I do? To kick up a scene of jealousy? To pull her away from Twoic’s side?
Then who was I?
Hooey-pricker in the demi-season coat from Alesha Ocheret, freshly from under the kicking herd in the square.
No one would want to have such a one by her side, even if she were your own wife.
They did not really manage to hurt me in the recent skirmish, but how painful it was to walk along with Petyunya now! 

He and Twoic saw us to the square and then down the street to the bridge by the hostel where we finally managed to part.
For a goodbye, Twoic averting his look from me and taking often drugs at his cigarette expounded on how he recently had one of his biofac sluts and she embraced his waist with her legs while he was dragging her around the room lifted by her tits in the grip of his hands.
That self-advertising of a male winner really shocked me.
I would never share such shit in presence of even those sluts of his.
That Twoic was just a dirty mudak.

When we went on towards Red Partisans, Eera never put her hand on to my arm and kept silent.
I just had to shut up as well.
There is no reward in apologizing to unfamiliar girls...

The management of SMP-615 found a way to at least partially smooth out the fact of keeping around a bricklayer with a diploma.
I was appointed one of the assessors at the Comradely Court. 

Such a court considers offenses not included in the articles of the criminal code, or if envisaged there then not breached to the excess; some petty vandalism, or theft of trifles.
The Comradely Court was rather a means of moral restricting than a punishment in all the severity of the law.
The position of that court assessor was not paid and bestowed by the election.
However, it’s not always possible to draw a clear border between election and appointment.
When at the trade union meeting, the question ‘Who’s for?’ sounds as not a question to those present, but simply serves a signal for them to raise their hands.
A classic example of a secondary reflex, as demonstrative as by a Pavlov’s dog.

Exactly the same reflexology as at the Komsomol meetings.
Actually, in all the period of my working at SMP-615, there occurred just one such meeting caused by a visit of an inspector from the City Komsomol Committee. 

It’s unlikely that he came to the hall on the second floor of the SMP-615 administrative building on his own accord, he sooner was charged to check how high the life was running among enthusiastic youth under the age of 28 among the construction workforce.
He was so utterly depressed by a complete disinterestedness in even the most pressing issues of our time, that at the end of the meeting, catastrophically swift in rolling down to its end, he turned with a question to the present:
‘Why are you so passive?’
Then I had to get up and answer his question with a rhetorical one:
‘And who, I wonder, would the active lead if there were no passive ones?’
Still, the diploma obliged you to follow a certain line of conduct.
The inspecting functionary was unprepared for answering the counter-question and the meeting safely closed... 

So, the SMP-615 management decided that they would pay a proper tribute to the higher education system of our land when I, a carrier of a diploma for such education, was made an assessor in the comradely court. 
The court itself required one chairman and two assessors for the period of one year, until the next report-and-election meeting of the trade union.

It seems, at that position I proved to be a latent tyrant, proposing overly draconian punishments to the offenders.
For example, a month of solitary (sic!) correctional labor for the plasterer Trepetilikha in the far northern parts of the SMP-615 grounds. 
Whereas, for her, a day was lost if on the bus route from the station to the In-Seven-Winds she would not yackety-yack a couple of colleagues to a coma! 

Of course, from the SMP-615 production building (the place of the supposed correctional labor) to the Checkpoint house by the entrance gate there was a distance of merely 200 meters.
The Checkpoint house was the seat of Svaitsikha the watchwoman, whose tongue also was in no need of oiling. 
However, the court did not heed my proposal and sentenced Trpetilikha to be removed for three months from the position of the forewoman of plasterers team, which meant a ten-rubles cut in payment for each penalty month. 

Anyway, she got off easily because her offense could even have a political resonance.
The trial revealed the following chain of events:
Trepetilikha leaned out of a window in 110-apartment block and saw that the accountant of the SMP-615 was going home.
Well, and why not go?
She lived in the In-Seven-Winds area and it took her about ten minutes of a leisurely stroll to get home from the SMP-615 administrative building.
And the time was already twenty to five.
Her mistake was that she answered the question of Trepetilikha drooping out of the window:
‘Well, well, and what’s there to be carried?’
She meant the plastic bag in the hands of the passer-by.
‘Fish,' answered the dimwit of an accountant. 

The word ‘fish’ worked as the detonator.
Trepetilikha went to pieces, collected the women of her plasterers' team and, with prolonged intonations, informed them on the unfair distribution of life's good's, despite the era of developed socialism. 
‘They're sitting there in the offices! Made them warm and cozy! An electric heater under each bitch's asshole! And we a getting stiff with the cold! And when it's fish, it's for them? 
Enough, girlfriends! Collect your spats and hawks! Yes, and even so brazenly replying: ‘It’s fish I've got.’ But we have no families?!’

The fact is that our ‘seagull’ bus at times brought food from the ORS.
Once, when we were on the 110-apartment block they brought fresh buns, and on the 100-apartment block, it was mineral water in glass bottles of 0.5 liters. 
When and what was meted out in the administrative building of the SMP-615 I do not know, but the following day the women of Trepetilikha’s team did not start working and that, from whatever viewpoint, was a strike.

I do not know whether they had brought them fish or some other equivalent, but the finishing work was, after all, continued and Trepetilikha stood before the court.
That is, our comradely court.
The SMP-615 management could not turn a blind eye to the fact of idle time with a political lining to it, especially as the deputy chief technologist wore a tie with the image of a sickle and hammer.
And it says a lot.

Yes, my cloth scarf bore a pattern of a Kremlin tower on top of the five Olympic Rings and the inscription ‘Moscow-80’, but I had nothing to choose from while the neckties at the Department Store were fairly diverse: crisscrossed, striped, and even with pea-spots...

After mature contemplating, it seems to me that by rejecting my proposal to transfer Trepetilikha to the SMP-615 base, the comradely court made a wise decision.
Keeping her there would tantamount to playing with fire on top of a powder keg.
Had they brought there something of which she did not get a share she'd blow up the whole base. 

‘There are certain women in the settlements of Russia...’

Without false modesty, I should note that in the villages of Konotop regions one can come across even more cool females, whose potential could be measured only in megatons, and even by the Richter scale.
‘Phui! What brazen folks I have to get along with! Assaulted me with the whole of the village out! I had barely managed to bark them off!’

And the welder Volodya Shevtsov would even get exiled had the court played along with my proposal. 
He was a very professional welder having worked for twenty years at the KEMZ Plant and there was some kind of hereditary intelligence about him.
Maybe that’s why he was drinking like a fish.
When looking at his crisp curly hair, I somehow had associations with the city on the Neva.
There was some intelligentsia flair in Volodya… something from the white nights of Petetown… the Peterhof fountains…
But got tanked up as any other boozer especially on a payday.

At the court session its chairman described the case as follows:
‘We get to the station square after work and by reaching the first traffic lights from there Volodya manages to get plastered in full.’
Well, it was he who slept: from the station to the traffic light by the Under-Overpass there were two delis plus “The Meeting’ bar.

Then I suggested sending Volodya to exile.
To some countryside where no traffic lights were hanging, with their satanic wink, and Volodya would have no reason to booze until he’s steaming.

The court rejected such an inhumanity and Volodya himself took offense at me, also he did not show it.
And that’s a pity, he was so classically refined.
‘If you would like to go and fuck yourself, please?’
And you as if feel with your skin the breeze from the seafront of our cultural capital...


The SMP-615 was based in Konotop, but it had several branches operating at other places: a pair of jacks in Kiev, a construction team and a truck crane in Bakhmach, a team with a ‘Belarus’ tractor in Vorozhba…

The third case was that of the overseer from the Bakhmach team.

They finished somewhat building and were leveling the adjacent area with a bulldozer borrowed from a local organization.
The overseer noticed that a pile of earth was being moved onto a defective bridging slab left over after the building completion.
So he took the slab into the yard of his friend or relative, to cover the earth-cellar pit.
The construction object was safely completed and then some rat reported the plunder of the socialist property.

At that court session I had only one question to the criminal:
‘What would happen to the cracked slab were it not taken to cover the earth-cellar?’
He shrugged discontentedly and replied:
‘Would be buried in the ground. What else?’

I demanded to declare public gratitude to the foreman for his contribution to raising the general welfare of the Soviet people.
It did not matter who was whose relative, but all of us were one united family.
Due to the general monotony of life, that proposal was neglected too.

At the next year report-election trade union meeting, no one mentioned my name for election to the Comradely Court. 
As if I had never had that f-f.. fully worked off diploma in my life...

When you turned one year old you came on a visit to Konotop.
Briefly, for a week or two.
That summer there were frequent thunderstorms.
After one of them, I drove you in the carriage for a walk. 
My mother and Eera had long opposed it, but I did not want to sit in the house and wait for the next rainfall.
Finally, Eera allowed our going out and they went back to sleep; people grow sleepy in the rain.

There were lots of large puddles all over the road, but you and I still managed to make a circle through almost all of the Settlement – from the tram terminal to the Bogdan Khmelnitsky street and back along the Professions street.
You were adequately dressed and sleeping under the buckled apron and the raised hood of the carriage. 
Only at the end of the Professions street, when the rubber tire fell off the front right wheel of the carriage, you woke and sat up and grabbed the tire which I had placed over the buckled apron. 
You grabbed it with your both hands as if it was a steering wheel, but I took away that wet and mud-stained piece of rubber. 
You whimpered a little, then hushed but never went to sleep again.
The Decemberists street was not far away already and we reached there on just hind wheel pair of the carriage... 

Then the weather cleared and in a couple of days I took you out to the field near the tram terminal.
I got you out of the carriage and put on the green grass.
You were not too firm on your legs then and just stood with your hand leaning against the carriage side. 
I lay down in the grass next to you.
The green field slanted upward into the blue sky, and larks were singing from up there.
So loud, joyful.
You stood there until on your red pantyhose appeared a dark patch of moisture.
I had to take you back home because pampers had not been invented yet...

Another time I took a spare pantyhose and drove you to the pond of Shapovalovka, which Kuba and I had been visiting on our bicycles.
It’s not too far, five kilometers or so.
You slept all the way.

The pond of Shapovalovka was rather big.
I stopped the carriage on a low sandy beach to watch what would be your reaction to an unfamiliar world.
You had not seen any ponds yet.
It’s like the first walk-out from a spaceship to an unknown planet.

You woke and sat up, left on your own with something you've never seen in a lifetime.
I stood behind the raised hood, so as not to interfere with the first impressions. 

You turned to the left – only the wide water surface was seen from your place. 
And on the right, too, there was an incomprehensible substance, and you burst into tears. 

Of course! Waking up in the middle of who knows what and all alone.
I had to show up and we rolled back...

The cloth line at the 13 Decemberists street was stretched from the gate to the front porch.
Dry clothes were hanging on it and under them, you were sitting in your carriage. 
My mother stood next to it with the basin in her hands, she was collecting the dried washing.
You suddenly seized on something hanging by your side and rose in the carriage standing in all your height. 
My mother told me to remove the baby and you, in a way of response, threw both your hands up, as if in a dance.
Look how big I am and what I can do already!
Something so dark and eerie flashed through my mother’s eyes that I instinctively pulled you back.

Rather, I pulled on the handle of the carriage and by that move, I yanked its bottom from under your feet. 
You tumbled over its edge on the ground.
The ground was, luckily, soft and you landed, fortunately, on your back.
I at once picked up you crying at the top of your lungs, but Eera was already rushing from the garden in panther leaps to pound her fists on my head and the shoulders because my hands were occupied holding you...

The local train taking you back to Nezhin was overcrowded.
The passengers were standing in the aisle in one thick mass and even in the passages between the bench-seats by the windows.
When I had to take your plastic potty to the toilet in the car vestibule, I kept it over my head like a waiter's tray in a crowded tavern... 

(...in my memory, I keep two sets of pictures which can be easily retrieved for consideration in their detail. 
The first set is a collection of apocalyptic pictures where there is the howling darkness, fleeing crowds and cold horror.
The second one contains nice heart-warming pics, but they wake up a longing for something unreachable, or unfulfilled. 
Like that view through the open door of the bus pulled up near Vapnyarka and there is a thin concrete post with a blue tin square at its top numbered 379 and next to it a narrow gap for a country road between the walls of ripening wheat stopped in their motion and from the road a boy of ten keeps up his hand over his wheat-color-haired head to wave goodbye to the departing bus…

I mean to say that all the pictures with you in them are from the second set…)

After coming back from Odessa, I lived in a state of constant fit of panic, in agonizing fear of what had to inevitably happen and possibly had already happened.
The fear was accompanied by jealousy of not someone specifically but about the fact that he would take my Eera from me.
I kept the torturing fear concealed as something shameful but it was always by me. 

The torment eased only when Eera was nearby when I was slaving at a construction site or worked at the translation of another story.
But even then the anxiety pressing me all the time did not disappear wholly but only receded into the background.
Physical pain is more merciful – the part of the brain where its signals are directed after a while is turned off and the pain no longer reaches you.

I did not attempt to alleviate my situation.
Firstly, because I never learned to analyze and make up plans for actions, I just live silently enduring the unbearable. 
Secondly, the alternative to that agony was no less horrible than the agony itself...

Our team was sent to the local train stop ‘Pryseymovye’ by the bridge over the Seim river with the task of building a 2-apartment cottage for the track-men and their families.
We worked there about a fortnight.

At one of the midday breaks, I spread my spetzovka on the grass and lay down next to the sun-scorched path with the ants bustling along the cracks in its surface. 
For passing time at midday breaks I read ‘Vsesvit’, a monthly thick magazine received on subscription.
It printed Ukrainian translations from the world literature of all times and peoples.
Soon I got tired of reading and put my head on a page of the open magazine.

It was a sunny day around filled to the brim with busy summer life.
The ants were dragging something along the cracked path, under the rare gusts of a cooling breeze, the tall grass swayed carrying the trembling shadows of leaves in the trees above it.
The air was filled with the unending buzz of horseflies, bees, and just flies. 
From time to time the breeze lazily raised the page next to the one on which my head lay and then everything around got screened off with whiteness and blurry spots of letters brought too close to the pupil.

The risen page effaced the piers of the bridge across the river and the long spit of an empty sand island washed up by the unruly current.
And the fisherman with a long fishing rod standing on the islands also disappeared behind the white blurriness.

Then the page would fall down and the fisherman would appear again standing already in the current up to the ankles of his rubber boots.

The fishing rod got bent by the taut line, he whipped it up and snatched from the turbulent stream the flickering splendor of a caught fish.
The fisherman took it off the hook and threw behind his back on the spit where the fish went on pulsating on the sand.
He threw the baited hook back into the river and, watching the float, did not notice the river gull sneaking up along the sand to the beating of the fish.

Grabbing its prey, the bird flew up.
The fisherman did not see that, neither how another river gull, dived from above the bridge attacking the first one. 
They collided in an air fight and the fish fell from five meters high back into the river.
The fisherman did not see anything of that, he stubbornly followed the float.

It was only I who watched the whole proceeding, but nothing touched me.
I did not even hold the page for uninterrupted watching.
The river and the blur took turns before my eyes and I saw that all of that was Nothing.

All that life full of events and struggling was just a series of pictures on top of Nothing.

I watched, and I could also not watch and nothing would change anything.
Everything was drowned in Nothing.
Even the constantly present pain receded getting flooded with Nothing from which I did not need anything.

I lay stretched like that long spit of sand around which the stream of life hastes murmuring and splashing but we both knew that all that was just the same and absolute Nothing.

That is a terrifying knowledge.
How can you live with it?
How to live on when you do not want anything and do not wait for something?
So the choice I had was not too big – either Eera and the unsubsiding agony or Nothing...

Eera was visiting Konotop without you as well.
For example, for Vladya's wedding when the winter was setting in. 
He was marrying Alla, who already had a child and worked in a large canteen.

The wedding party was held at the same canteen on the outskirts of the city, near the stop of the diesel train to Dubovyazovka. 
The ‘live music’ included the heavily bald Skully and the still curly-haired Chuba.
At times, at the requests of the guests, Vladya also sang with the ex-Orpheuses.
Everything was delicious, loud and fun.

But that was on the second day of Eera's stay, and on the evening of the first day, I made two discoveries. 

The first was about the hidden resources of a human body.

Late in the evening Eera and I went through the veranda to the attached room.
In the winter it was not heated and became just a storeroom of all sorts of household things.
When leaving the kitchen Eera threw over her shoulders some of the jackets from the hanger by the door.
She always liked to try something on.
