
In the room among the other things there stood a pair of old armchairs, the relics from the Object times, with wooden armrests under yellow varnish and we had a sex.

At such moments I did not think of any agonies…

We seemed to cum together but Eera, with her eyes half-closed, started to moan ‘More! More!.’
Until that moment I knew it for sure that after orgasm you needed to get at least half an hour of rest.
‘Mo-ore!.’

And I got up again and we went on above the freshly spilled semen on the floorboards.

That is impossible but it happens, as it's turned out... 

The second discovery, concerning the white spots in the human conscience, happened when Eera and I returned to the living room.

My father had been already gone to the bedroom and my mother, who felt completely out of sorts that evening, was sitting on the sofa with her hands stretched aside onto its seat without looking at the TV between the two windows. 
Only Lenochka was watching it from her as-yet-unfolded chair-bed.
The light was on only the living room and the TV was quietly murmuring also there.

After a little of groaning, my mother asked me and Eera to help her to the bedroom because she had no strength in her at all.
We took her by the arms from both sides and helped to get up.
With groans and shuffling her slippers on the floor, she, supported by us, moved to the curtained doorway to the dark kitchen.
In that manner, the three of us passed the middle of the room under the chandelier of five white shades of which only one painted a circle of yellowish electric light on the ceiling. 

When there remained just two meters to the doorway, the circle of light suddenly disappeared and I found myself surrounded by the darkness which was not complete because I could discern that I was having a sex with my mother from behind.
The horror shook me like an electric shock and I got back in the living room.
To the doorway to the kitchen, there was still a distance of about one meter. 

I gave Eera a frightened look over the white kerchief on my mother's head.
Eera, with her eyebrows knit together, took care to keep her eyes on the lowered profile of my mother as if she had not noticed anything. 
It was just a vision, but more prolonged than that second of running through the Greek night.

I asked Eera to stop, hurried into the kitchen and turned the light on.
We took my mother to the bedroom and helped to lay down on the bed where my father muttered something in his sleep. 
We returned to the living room.
I laid out the chair-bed for Lenochka and unfolded the sofa for us.

Soon the hutta turned into a sleeping kingdom.
Only the clock on the wall above the TV was ticking against my temples.
It also did not know what was that all and why all that had been happening to me...

Accepting the notebooks with my translations, Zhomnir, as earlier, jerked up his bushy eyebrow and began reading to insert his pencil marks in between widely spaced lines, although he agreed that his options were also not ideal.
‘Your trouble, Sehrguey, is that Ukrainian is not your native tongue, you hadn't absorbed it with your mother's milk.' 
But I refrained from explaining that the first months of my life I was fed with the milk of Carpathian cows. 

He went into his archival chamber and returned with a thin book in his hands.
‘Gutsalo’s stories. That’s how one should write!’
And Zhomnir started to read out excerpt sentences from the book, clicking his tongue at the end of the especially cool ones, then he handed the book to me to learn the craft.

(...I had read that collection and other works by E. Gutsalo.
What can I do if the descriptions of the morning dew chime on cucumber seedlings do not hook me up?
(For that same reason, by the way, I do not like Yesyenin even though he’s from Ryazan region.)
Besides, after ‘The Enchanted Desna’ by Gonchar who had so beautifully exhausted the subject, anyone picking it up anew is doomed to a miserable copying of the flavors and mood.
And when Gutsalo tried his hand at writing on a city life, he moved down to the level of the cartoon magazine ‘Perets’.
I am ready to agree that in one of such stories he presented the reddish brick dust on the black padded jackets of bricklayers, but the noted detail has nothing to do with the plot or characters in the story.
And the detail remained just hanging about like a limp dick in an immense vagina... 

The constituent parts of a work should converge into and develop the whole structure.
The way as the constellation of the Southern Cross and the red hair of the doctor under the lamp on the empty ship deck in the opening paragraphs of ‘The Rain’ by Somerset Maugham, suggestively send the reader down the road to the clash of prostitution and priesthood…)

Yet Zhomnir should know better and I started to fill the shortcomings of milk nutrition in my infancy and eliminate the backwash of skipping the Ukrainian literature lessons at school.

On the cover of a thin copybook, I wrote ‘Ukr. Lit.' and then read all of the books in Ukranian from the two long shelves in the library of the Plant Club. 
There were both Lesya Ukrainka and her mother Olena Bdgilka, and Panas Myrny with his oxen, and the great Kobzar, and Marko Vovchok, and Ivan Franko, and Jankowski (the idol of Zhomnir) and many others in alphabetical order.
About some of them, even Zhomnir knew only from the notes of the overview lectures he had attended in his student years. 

(...sifting all that through the sieve of careful reading, I can safely state that in terms of artistic value most of the authors did not manage to create anything above the level of petty amateurs.
‘Where there is no nightingale, you're left with a sparrow chirrup’, as runs a Ukrainian proverb.
The sparrow-writers remained just re-tellers of the latest European fashion in the belles-lettres. 
That’s great! Glory be to them!
The Ukrainian language began to be seen through the press.
However, that’s politics and I am talking about the literature.

Of the Ukrainian literature only three would pass with their colors flying in front of the world literary standards:
a) poet Kandyba, aka Olyes, who for years had been walking knee-deep in blood at the Kiev slaughterhouse writing the tenderest poems imaginable;
b) writer Vasil Stephanic;
c) writer Les Martović.

The real master knows what he wants to say, because he had what to say, and he knows how to say it. 
The rest of literature aficionados just jingle cowbells in an attempt to portray the new-fashioned waltzes by Herr Strauss, which he creates to the delight and admiration of the decent European public. 
But we will catch up and overtake his orchestra because we’ve got inimitable balalaikas!..)

So after work, I had something to do. 
And a local train can be turned into a passable study.
That’s why on Fridays I went to the In-Seven-Winds with the briefcase and after work, in the train car, I took out of it a thin copybook, a pen, and a volume of stories by Maugham in English.

Stooping over the compact print in a book page, I plunged into the tender humid night of the exotic southern seas, where the fragrance of the jungle in bloom spreads for miles from the islands.
Emerging back from there with a pair of clumsy lines for the copybook, I stacked the prey into the ruled paper cells and dived away again to roam along the sandy beach by water edge with white-crested, even in the dark, waves of the rolling surf and with a start looked through the window of the car… Pryosterny?. So soon?. 
The next is Nezhin.
It was a delicious time.

Writing into a copybook put on top of the briefcase was not comfortable, yet the desk problem found its elegant solution.
On Fridays after work, I took out from my locker the plywood piece that served there as the shelf for headgear.
If you keep a piece of plywood 50×60cm under your armpit it doesn’t look outrageous and is not in the way when getting on a bus or a train car.

Upon arrival in Nezhin, the desk perfectly fitted into an automatic storage cell while the briefcase traveled all the way to Red Partisans and under the table with the tulle tablecloth on which stood the old pier mirror.
The expenses for storage of the plywood piece in a cell amounted to reasonable 30 kopecks – 15 kopecks to set the code inside the door and slam it; 15 kopecks more to open it after collecting the code from the outside.

Once on the way back to Konotop, the cell door jammed.
In such cases, it's opened by an on-duty station attendant with a special key and in presence of a militiaman. 
Before the opening the frivolous cell, the militiaman asked me about the items put inside.
I did not want to strain the man and never mentioned any desk, but he refused to believe in a piece of plywood too. 
When the attendant opened the cell door and I pulled out those 50×60cm and walked away, the militiaman still for a long time looked into the dusty emptiness of the cell.
Quoting one of the sayings of our team foreman, Mykola Khizhnyak, ‘inspected like a magpie a piece of broken bone’...

And sometimes in the briefcase, I also was bringing things to be washed because Eera told to do so. 
And I felt pleased because of that we sort of were becoming a family even though it was in the mother-in-law’s washing machine.

However, the first family celebration was no success. 
You had turned exactly one year old and I invited Eera to go to a restaurant.
She refused because Gaina Mikhailovna was not in favor of going to restaurants.
Actually, at first Eera a little hesitated – to go or not to go?
But I did not manage to persuade her because of my tongue-tied manner of speaking.

Most often the fits of tongue-tiedness attack me in everyday situations. 
I just do not know how to explain obvious things.
‘I say, well, let’s go, eh?’
While the mother-in-law, leaning against the jamb of the door to the bedroom, puts out reasonable arguments that it should take a woman at least two days to get ready for going to a restaurant.
‘Well, what? Come on, let’s go, okay?’
And that instead of saying that it's our daughter's first birthday which would never repeat itself and that sometimes impromptu happen to be better than planned events. 
Tongue-tiedness is a real curse. 

It’s only on some abstract topics that I’m ready with a repartee.
When Brezhnev for the first and final time was passing Konotop by a two-car train, they put his portrait next to the station on a tin shield taller than the building itself.
The giant portrait of dear Leonid Ilyich—Mind, Honor and Conscience of our Time—with all his Gold Star medals of the Hero of the Soviet Union on his jacket.
In case, he would glance from the bypassing car and see how hugely he’s loved around here.

Only they forgot to warn me it was the day of his traveling by and I walked from the Settlement along the tracks until a militia sergeant stopped me and told I could not go to the station.
Okay, said I, I was not going to the station but to the Under-Overpass, and I would take that service path around so that to keep my jeans clear of the fuel oil smeared rails.

The guy in the militia uniform loved and respected Brezhnev no more than I did.
However, taking into account the attendant circumstances—a person without a uniform tries to prove something to a guy in a uniform who, moreover, has an order—he asked me an absolutely well-grounded question:
‘Are you sick?’
And then, with pride, I gave it out:
‘I am incurably diseased with life.’
So promptly – I liked it myself!
The sergeant, with awe and admiration, could not find what else to say but did not let me pass all the same. 

So I celebrated the family holiday alone, although Eera and Gaina Mikhailovna predicted in a duo that nothing good would come of it.
And it was an accurate prophecy.

All I could get in ‘Polissya’ restaurant was a shot of vodka – the last one they had, they told me so.
I was encouraged to buy a bottle of cognac instead, but I'm not a drunk to put away a half liter of cognac alone. 
I confined myself to that single shot and meditations that it was no good to argue with Mothers and that under the conditions of all-pervading matriarchy there certainly had to be a system of communicating vessels between my mother-in-law and the unfriendly waitress.

‘Seagull’ was located farther away from Red Partisans and there I managed to buy a bottle of champagne and a parsley salad for a snack.
And on my way back from the celebration the champagne hit my bladder.

In those days (in the hope to avoid the inevitable) I tried to do everything right.
That was, like sort of insurance – the righteous guy’s wife couldn’t cheat him… or what?
There, of course, were no guarantees but, if you did not think about it too deep, it inspired a timid hope.

Peeing on the sidewalk was wrong, so I went to the toilet in the Bazaar.
The Bazaar gates turned out to be locked for a long time before my coming and I had to climb over.
That also was not entirely correct but not too noticeable in the dark.

By the time when in the corner of the empty and dark Bazaar I approached the iron-sheet toilet door there already stood a block-letter inscription on it ‘On Repair’, drawn with chalk.
As the champagne was on the peak of its fight for freedom I had to pour out my indignation at the dictatorship of the communicating vessels on that same door.
Without affecting the inscription though.

Well, and who else could I meet climbing down the gates if not a militia patrol? 
Welcome to your native planet.
Of course, they did not buy it that someone would go over the closed gate when there was so much sidewalk around in the dark.
I was taken to the sobering-up station.

The doctor there, to check my stage of intoxication, offered to perform several forward bends.
‘Heels together, toes apart?’ said I conversationally.
But that capillary vessel complicated the task and I had to do the bends with my feet put close to each other. 
The doctor asked how much and what stuff had been drunk, received clear information, and with a shrug handed me over to the lieutenant.

The lieutenant asked me about my place of work and, learning I was not local, asked for my mother-in-law’s number and called Gaina Mikhailovna to identify my voice over the phone.
Then they just pointed at the door, refusing to give me a little lift, otherwise, they would lock me up if I did any more nuisance of myself. 

So despite the stubborn opposition of conspiring females and their henchmen, your first birthday became a unique event – the one and only time when I got into a sobering-up station...

The development of my and Eera’s relations was going through gradual and quite predictable stages.

At first, when after a working week I came to Nezhin and excitedly pressed the doorbell button Eera immediately opened the door for me.
I hugged her in the hallway and we kissed.
She even smeared my wrists with glycerin to treat the skin cracked from the frost at the construction site.
‘Well, what a silly fool you are!’ said Eera and I felt happy although the skin hurt.

At the next stage, we stopped kissing. 

Still later, instead of embraces, we exchanged the casual cues: 
‘How d’you?’
‘Fine.’
And that is correct because something needs to be said.

The relations did not stop at that and the door started to be opened by my parents-in-law.
For the most part by my father-in-law.
Sometimes I already had to push the doorbell button twice...

In the winters when my hands' skin condition became of no interest, I stopped frosting it. 
Probably, I became more experienced or else the skin realized it had no chances to be treated with glycerin anymore. 

At our last of the kisses in the hallway, I immediately realized that something was wrong.
Instead of her lips Eera somehow guiltily put up her neck and there was a whiff of the fox smell.
It's not that I had ever sniffed a fox but instantly determined – it's a vixen funk.

Later on that visit, she told me that she was home alone, the doorbell rang and it turned out to be one of her classmates from school.
He knelt before her in the kitchen, embraced and kissed her knees, but she told him to leave and nothing happened.
And I, of course, had another fit of agony, but then I got numb and clenched my wrongly knocking heart and began to live on...

From the hallway, I proceeded to the bathroom, washed my hands and from there to the living room to say ‘good evening' to everybody there and sit down at the table by the windowsill. 
The center of the table was occupied by the TV but there still remained enough place on the oilcloth for the plate, fork, and bread so that I could have supper. 
I did not block the screen and did not bother anyone, if only aesthetically – by demonstrating my chewing profile to the left of the TV. 

Then I took the dishes to the kitchen and washed up.
And those stacked in the sink after all the meals on that day.
I was not ashamed to wash up even when Tonya’s husband, Ivan, was entering the kitchen.
On the contrary, I was proud that Gaina Mikhailovna trusted me with the task, after a couple picky quality checks at the beginning.

First of all, I boiled a kettle of water on the gas stove because it took too long to heat it in the titan for which it was necessary to bring firewood from the basement.
I was washing up in a large bowl put in the sink.
Civilization had not yet come up with detergents and other useful things for washing dishes then, so I used a large piece of gauze soaped with a bar of laundry soap.
And then, of course, I rinsed all under the tap.
Everything by the technology which Gaina Mikhailovna showed me once.
Washing up helped me to pass the time.
I even liked it, especially in that part of the process, when the gas was burning under the kettle with a blue flame.

I was also trusted with dusting carpet taken out to the yard off the floor in the living room.
It was very worn and shabby so one could feel free to beat it thoroughly when dusting.
Sometimes Eera would go out in the yard where I was working it over and she would say that it was enough already because the neighbors in the apartment block were human beings too and deserved compassion.
And Gaina Mikhailovna once said that the method of my dusting showed a translator.
I cannot imagine where she could have seen translators busy with that job...

At times I offered some services on my own accord. 
Once Gaina Mikhailovna was very worried that her son Igor was hospitalized in Kiev because of being ill and she could not go there and find out how he was and I suggested that I would go.

Igor was very surprised and could not believe that I had come to Kiev with no agenda apart from visiting him.
Four hours in a local train to see my brother-in-law with whom I did not know what to talk about.
If I had told of having an interest of my own and that in those four hours I finally read ‘The Journey from St.Petersburg to Moscow' by Radishchev, would it feel better for him? 

Then I had to report to my mother-in-law what her son looked like.
Well, he looked quite normal, except for a certain monkish air, as all the other patients there.
At the hospital, they were given long blue gowns and kept their military headgear. 
That resulted in a wondrous combination of clothing, especially when you watch a couple of patients walking in an alley – the Merlin-like blue robes under the khaki halos with cockades.
Some special order of monks forage-cappians. 

And I was also entrusted with painting the apartment floor.
With glossy red paint.
Not at one go, naturally, because people had to live in the apartment being renovated.
So it took two weekend-visits.
And the kitchen, the hallway and the corridor connecting them Ivan Alexeyevich painted in my absence.

He helped me a lot when I decided to make bookshelves in the form of a bookcase without the doors and walls.
The shelves were, naturally, designed for our future family library.
Ten volumes of the Dictionary of Ukrainian Language were already collected.
I was too late to subscribe to the Dictionary, but many of its subscribers soon stopped to waste their money and the volumes were put on sale at bookstores. 
Besides the incomplete collection of the Dictionary volumes, there were full Kvitka-Osnovyanenko works in four volumes, a dozen of books in English and a motley company angled from different bookstores. 

I could not get the material needed for the project at the SMP-615 and asked my father-in-law to have the planks planed and cut in the carpenter workshop at the Bakery Plant.
I gave him the list of measurements I needed.
When he brought the bundle of readied planks and put it in the hallway of his apartment he tried to convince me it was impossible to make anything worthy out of them.
He even called Eera to the hallway and said:
‘Look, what shelves could be made of these slats?’
And they indeed looked very slim, but before ordering I had thought out thoroughly how to make shelves that would be both light and sturdy.

The project was accomplished at 13 Decemberists because in Nezhin there were neither conditions nor tools for such an undertaking. 
And when I sawed out the bridle joins in the planks, and bonded them with casein glue, polished with sandpaper and covered with varnish then even my father approved the shelves. 

Eera on one of her visits to Konotop was not too much impressed though, at furniture stores you could see more baroque items, these were shelves, yes, and so what?
And Ivan Alexeyevich’s false forecasts could easily be understood – a worker at the Bakery Plant workshop told him the planks were unsuitable for the project and he just repeated the opinion of a professional.

But then my route in Eera’s parent apartment grew even shorter.
One time on my arrival at Red Partisans it took my father-in-law really long to open the door.
Entering the hallway I heard the cries of a squabble.
It happens, a family stank.
I heard angry yells of Ivan, Tonya’s husband, in high-pitched tones, she herself flashed to the kitchen and back, more voices confusedly wrangled in the living room.
Eera peeped into the hallway:
‘The bread is on the table, put the rest yourself.’
And she disappeared again to bicker on with Ivan. 

On account of my arrival, the theater of hostilities moved over to the bedroom of Tonya’s family.
From the living room, it was only heard that Ivan took a circular defense in the corner and his parents-in-law and sister-in-law, individually and then in chorus cried out to him what they particularly were not happy with. 
The words were not to be made out but I could tell that Ivan was answering in short bursts, in a manner of Bandera men guerrillas.

At times some of the attackers retreated to the living room – to recollect what else they had omitted to tell and then again rushed back into the clashes. 
Except for Tonya who did not leave the bedroom, but kept monotonously repeating her clue.
I did not even look there, but everything was clear enough, family squabbles do not shine with the diversity of dispositions.

And all that was boiling against the background of wild screams from the rebellious farmers in Central Asia because the TV was feeding series of ‘The Man is Changing Skin’ and they kept rushing there from one edge of the screen to the other.
Hence the voices.
The rioters took advantage of the watchers being distracted by personal sorting things out in the bedroom.
The dehkans grew so impudent that even jumped out of the TV and continued their rat-racing around the oilcloth on the table.
And I knew that you could expect anything from that TV...

One Sunday, my mother-in-law cooked soup from a bare bone and put the plate for me next to the TV.
And there some mafia clan members were forcing a judge to commit a suicide.
So he put a bullet through his temple and the brains splashed over right into my plate – oops!
And my mother-in-law stood vigilant behind my back to control if I would show the proper respect to her cooking.
What was there to do?
I had to lap it hot...

But no one would escape the just retribution, and now, that the TV and I remained eye to eye, I clicked it onto another channel.
It turned out a violin quartet of chamber music.

But then the father-in-law jogged from the bedroom for recharging. 
And he felt that something was amiss, not as stimulating as expected.
He did not immediately realize that it was because of the cello. 
What could a cello have to do in a Central Asian bedlam?
And when he got it what was what he clicked the channels back.
And the dehkans to him in a joyful joint chorus:
‘Ala-la-ah!’
He inhaled it like a sip of energizer and, with replenished ammunition rushed back to the interminable battle...

Since that, on arrival, after the hallway and the bathroom, I proceeded straight to the kitchen.
There I laid the kitchen table to have some havvage.
And I never looked in the fridge so that later Gaina Mikhailovna would not half-audibly buzz to Eera her reprimands.
While I was eating, you would come running to the kitchen and start to say something in your own, as yet not very understandable language… 
However, I again ran ahead of the events.

To keep Eera, my Eera, to ensure that she would be mine and mine only, I went down the path of righteous life.

(...they do not sell the code of righteousness at the news stalls, but I did not need it.
Anyone knows without checking it by a code when they did the right thing and when not.
Even if your wrong-doing can have tons of excuses and justifications, or even called for by a written law, and even if everybody else around shows their support ‘well done! a good fellow!’ you still know, deep in your heart, that you’d better not have done that and, at that point, you’ll be right because you cannot deceive yourself and you knew all along what was right and what wasn’t.
They finish their empty praise and disperse, but you will have to live on and try to forget what you had done, or maybe to drown it in more and more wrong-doings.

My quest for righteousness was based on a personal interest: if I kept doing everything right then nothing wrong would happen to me, otherwise, it would be too unfair.
That’s what I was building my hopes on.
I never tried to give shape to my all those yearnings and only tried—really hard—to do everything right…)
