
That's why it took bricklayer Peter Lysoon 2-3 hours less than me to finish the walls of a bathroom-toilet. 
No wooden insertions? Spit a spat and go on laying the walls.
When the carpenters come to install the doors they would think of something to do about fixing the problem.
Is the partition laid with a ‘belly'? 
Who cares?
Say ‘they’ll eat it up!’ and leave it as it is.
The plasterers will come and solve the issue with an additional mortar layer.
But that’s not right.

Therefore, my specialization in the team was gypsum partitions and that of Peter – bathrooms.
However, nothing is a dogma and there always are moments for ‘off we go!’ and forced castling.

But that’s not the whole story.
Besides going the righteous path in the current life, I tried to correct my wrong-doings in the life past.
And that is something you can’t do without repentance.

When I came to the institute hostel, a former freshman Sehrguey from Yablunivka was finishing his fourth ear of study and still lived in Room 72. 
I returned to him the thick English-Russian Dictionary by Mueller.
‘Ho-ho! Where’s it from?’
‘I had stolen it from you.’
After a moment’s confusion, everyone in the room burst into loud laughter, which I involuntarily joined.

(...what’s funny there?
In his story ‘Jane', Maugham explains that there's nothing funnier than the truth. 
Nobody laughed though at the library of the Plant Club when I returned a couple of books stolen there and confessed that one more was missing.
I was really sorry and ready to reimburse.
They forgave me without compensation and did not even cancel my reader’s form…)

Two weeks later my father started to upbraid me for behaving as if I was not all there.
He stuck the forefinger out of his fist and fiercely drilled the air nearby his right temple.

I translated his gesture into the parlance of the Holy Script:
‘Go and take him for he’s out of his mind.’
‘And again some hooey frostbitten! Gone nuts in Nezhin? That’s what you’ve been sent to the institute for?’

Then I lowered the bar and switched over to the Ukrainian folklore:
‘And when the father’s hutta gets burnt down whose attic the sparrows will spend nights in?'
My father did not understand the humor, he did not know that parable and in the next week or two, the matches box from the gas stove in the veranda was missing. 
But then everything settled down and returned to normal.

‘I’m ashamed before people! You enter the tram and get frozen like a statue with your look nailed to the window.’
‘I have to knock step dance along the car, eh?’
‘No!! Just be like everyone else: “hello! how are you? great!” Do not be a renegade!’

And then ‘Time’ news program showed an employee of the Moscow Central Library named after Lenin who confessed that for several years he was stealing valuable publications from the archival department under his gray uniform coat.
I realized that I was not alone to redeem wrong-doings of the past.

But what had brought him on the path to righteousness?
‘The fur-coat-like form of schizophrenia.’
Unexpectedly entering the kitchen I overheard my father told my mother the diagnosis, most likely shared to Eera at the fourth kilometer in Chernigov.

But later on, the sorcerer of Ichnya, after two visits of my sister Natasha there, said he had done his job and I was healthy.
Eera became happy with the news but not I.

Life became boring.
The overwhelming powerful stream of conscience in which I had to choose the fairway like those rafters driving their log rafts down the foam-boiling rapids of the Carpathian rivers turned into placid shoals.
I could still see breakthroughs of the impossible into the world of everyday life—where everyone is like everyone else—but between them and me, there already was that dust-covered grating from the Bulgakov's novel, the dust on grates canceling all pirate brigantines in the unknown seas. 
The heat and full-blooded throb of the belonging vanished.

(...it’s one thing when you are actually riding a log-raft jostling and jumping under your feet and quite another kettle of fish if you can just hit Pause Button and leave all frozen until you’ve poured yourself a cup of tea…)

‘Return me my schizophrenia,’ with genuine bitterness said I to Natasha, but it was too late...

In Nezhin, on the platform near that station building corner where the round clock hung on the bar protruding from the station wall, Eera and I were waiting for the local train to Konotop.
She had the three-quarter yellow jacket on.
And the day was also sunny, a good summer day it was.
Eera smiled at me and said:
‘When I’ll be bad, remember me as I am now when I love you.’
‘Don't talk nonsense. You can't become bad.' 
‘Do not argue, I know.’
‘How can you know?’
‘I know. I am a witch.’
Her eyes turned sad and a slight imperceptible cross-eyedness crawled into them.
It was as slight as my disappointment for I had once thought she was a devil in love like that one in the book which I stole for Novoselitsky.
‘No worry,’ said I, ‘I’m a hexer too.’

Although what hexer could be of me?
Some sleepy warlock at best.

This thought was prompted by the black hardback covers of ‘The Phenomenology of the Spirit’ by Hegel which I bought in Odessa and was reading in the trailer of our team during the midday breaks.
Well, okay, to call it ‘reading' would be too bragging. 
I could not wade through more than one page in a break because I inevitably fell asleep.
I wonder if the translator understood himself what he was turning out or was just rendering it with a ‘perplexed mind’?.

In that Odessa bookstore, they did not want to sell this book to me. 
The two saleswomen were playing for time, exchanging accusatory glances.
At that time the cause of their embarrassment was more than clear for me: they had been expected a real warlock to pick up the book in black bounds, but now I just do not know what to think.
What’s the difference who buys what in the world where each one is like anyone else?
Be happy to complete the sales plan.

I kept Hegel in the locker.
The lockers in our team trailer had no locks but nothing disappeared from there.
Except for the diploma badge and a book by some Moscow literary man.
I read that simply out of a sense of duty, it was from my mother-in-law’s sideboard.

Then I brought ‘The Phenomenology of the Spirit’, in the form of an experiment, to check if it would get lost too.
No go.
I had to read it to the very end.
And then it turned out that it was not Hegel who wrote it at all, but somewhat Rozenkrantz noting down his lectures.
Then he published those notes so that they could translate the thing into Russian so that I would slumber in our team trailer. 
And thank you ever so much.

(...sometimes I ask myself: did the original lecturer really understand what he was talking about, or he just made a living by inventing a tricky way to juggle a ‘thing in itself’, a ‘thin on itself’ and other things in different positions?..)

But one passage I understood completely, where there is a reasoning that a German bricklayer has to eat half a pound of bacon and a pound of bread to fulfill the daily norm, while a French one manages to do it with just a bunch of grapes under his belt.

That summer saw the reconstruction at 13 Decemberists.
By the project of my father, the attached room was connected to the living room and the previous doorway to it from veranda sealed with a wall.
It was planned so that in winter the heat from the stove reached the attached room through the living room making it livable all year round.
The rest of the hutta was renovated too.

After the reconstruction, I moved to the attached-joined room and a friend of Natasha came on a visit from the city of Shostka. 
They used to study together in the Konotop Railway Technical School.
Then the girlfriend got married, divorced but had no regrets because she could sew jeans like ‘Levi’s’.
The fabric of her jeans was not quite the same, but she still earned good money.
She was not too tall, but well-tanned, and had dyed hair plus appetizing figure.
But I, of course, kept my glances in check and did not ask Natasha for how long her friend was going to stay.

Coming back from work, I sat at the desk in my room and read a book in English keeping a dictionary at hand, or else ‘Morning Star’ the newspaper of British communists.
Probably,  they were not exactly communists but nonetheless, their paper was sold at newsstands in the land of victorious socialism for 13 kopecks an issue. 
After the dinner, I worked on translations and had no time for special communication with the guest. 

I do not know where Eera learned about the guest at 13 Decemberists, but she suddenly started questioning about Natasha’s girlfriend and then she said that she herself wanted to move to Konotop and I had to talk with my parents.

I returned to Konotop on outspread wings and at once called my father and mother into the yard.
They sat side by side down on the bench under the tree by the porch and I remained standing on its steps.
Bubbling with hidden joy, I announced Eera’s wish to move to 13 Decemberists.
I was completely unprepared for what happened next. 

My mother crossed her arms over her chest and said that she would not accept Eera because it was impossible for them to get along together in one place.
I heard what she was saying but could not get it – how so?
My mother had always been for me and now she sat on the bench with her arms crossed saying she wouldn’t have Eera about here.
I turned to my father for help.
He shrugged.
‘What can I do? All the hutta documents are issued in her name, she’s the landlady.’

It was already dark in the yard, but in the light of the lamp lit in the veranda I saw how immovably sat my mother keeping inexorable silence.
I was desperately struggling to find what else could be said, at least something, but my mind was blank and void.
Nothing would persuade her.
My father went into the house and I was sitting on a porch step trying to think of something to say but in vain.
The gate latch-handle chinked and Natasha’s friend entered the yard.
She was alone, without Natasha.
‘And why are you like that?’ asked she and sat down next to my mother.

My mother immediately revived and started to explain that the next day the four of them—my parents, Natasha and Lenochka—would go to the RepBase camp for recreation by the Seim.
However, the refrigerator was full and those who remained in hutta could cater for themselves.
The girlfriend approved and turned so that the light from the veranda boldly depicted her large breasts covered with a soft turtleneck. 

Even dumbfounded by the result of the negotiations with my parents, I realized that I was doomed and when left alone with such breasts, without anyone else in the whole hutta, no bridle would keep me in check.
I knew myself and it was clear that my righteousness would not stand a week and even the fact that she was my mother’s nickname would not save me.
And whatever the fridge was full of, yet the innocent lamb prepared for the sacrifice was me.

The next day after work, I did not go, as usual, along the tracks and the Plant surrounding wall to the Decemberists street, but got on the tram to the Settlement and drove to school 13.
From there I moved along the Nezhin street, entering the yards of the huttas with the same question:
‘Where can I rent an apartment?’
At number thirty-something, I was told that in the hutta under the big birch opposite the Nezhin Store, they seemed to be renting. 

The birch was found in the indicated place and it was so old and tall that the red brick hutta under it looked very small.
However, there were two rooms and a kitchen, not counting the dark hallway-veranda.

The landlady, a single pensioner Praskovya Khvost, looked at me suspiciously, but showed a room of three by two meters, with the window looking out on the wide trunk of the birch in a neglected front garden.

 One-third of the room was occupied by an iron bed produced before the WWII. 
The entrance was from the kitchen with curtains instead of a door.
To the right from the same kitchen, behind the same curtains in the doorway, there was the owner’s room.
For me, it was essential to leave 13 Decemberists on that very day and we agreed on 20 rubles a month. 

(...Later, Lyda from our team told me that I could find an apartment the In-Seven-Winds for just 18 rubles but I did not even go to see…)

Coming to the Decemberists street, I borrowed a pull-cart from a neighbor put it at the gate to number 13 and only then entered the yard.

Galya was sitting in the armchair-bed watching TV.
I said polite 'hello' and that I was not hungry and went to my room to collect the books and disassemble the bookshelves. 

The room windows did not have leaves to open so I had to take the thing out going through the living room and the kitchen.
So as not to change the shoes with slippers at each go, I paved the floor with pages from ‘Morning Star’.
The young woman was uncomprehendingly watching my manipulations from her armchair.

I took the books and the bookshelves parts to the pull-cart waiting in the street.
All fitted only I had to drive slowly because the varnished shelves stacked on top were slipping over each other.

In the hutta by the Nezhin Store, my landlady had a visiting old woman and they grew silent and watched the underground functionary shipping stacks of illegal literature to his new safe house. 

Back in Decemberists street I returned the pull-cart to its owner and gathered some of the clothes—the briefcase from Odessa stood at the ready—then I very politely said 'goodbye' to Galya and left her alone with the TV because I know how to win with dignity.

(...actually, it was not her fault that she got into the thick of a family sorting out, later on, she was able to marry a guy from the Settlement, although not for too long, however, that's already her personal story...) 


