~~~ The Married Life ~~~

The SMP-615, aka Construction and Installation Train of the same number, was located about where I once chewed grass half-starved in the bicycle trip to the Seim river, only on the other side of the road.
At the time of my grazing experience, Konotop had not reached that place yet, but the city grew and the location became a part of the city district named ‘In-Seven-Winds'. 
Konotopers never needed to borrow a poetic vision of the world. 

At the beginning of December 1979, after a brief visit to a suburb area of Chernigov, I came to the SMP-615, because no tramway or bus routes were reaching there, it was as far as the hell itself, on the border of the In-Seven-Winds.
During the interview with the head of the personnel department, he made me faces a la Slavik Aksyanov. 
At some point, he even grabbed a wide wooden ruler from his desk and covered his left eye with it.
Afraid to jinx me?

The distortions hardly were caused by a hangover because I came there in the second half of the working day.
Just one of the things you have to dismiss with a shrug and forget.
Anyway, he provided me with a job at the organization, which as he explained, levied 10% of the apartments built by them to distribute among the SMP-615 workers according to the established line of those waiting for improvement of their housing conditions.
At the moment, the construction of 110 apartment block was underway with 23 people in the mentioned line.

I handed in the application and became 24th in the line.
Even the fact, that after the delivery of the 110-department block I was to become the 13th in the line did not scare me off.
Because in the next one or two blocks I would definitely get an apartment for my family.

I did not know then that not everything was as straightforward.
And the head of the personnel department did not have time to explain me the details and nuances because he changed his place of work.
The position was embraced by a retired army officer.
With the new personnel department head, everything was clear and subordinate since retired Major Petukhov kept under control his countenance. 

However, the facial expressions of the personnel department heads are not of much importance because the main people in my life for the next six years became the team of bricklayers.
In the SMP-615 there was only one team of bricklayers, all the rest – plasterers, welders, carpenters, plumbers came to the erected objects after us.

The workforce at the mortar-concrete unit, crane operators, laborers was an auxiliary layer. 
Even the engineers and accountants remained secondary when compared to us.
It was we who came to the deep foundation pits to fill them with installed multi-tonnage concrete blocks with the assistance of the truck crane operator Gavkalov.
Then the epic of growth of the building walls and ‘filling’ followed in cooperation with the tower crane operated by Mykola, Kolya, and Vitalya.

The crane operators replaced each other, welders changed, but we stayed and withstood, for who else, if not we, would transform the space?
In place of an air-filled void for coasting crows, stair flights marched up along which the tenants are till now climbing up to their homes on the heights of previously unattainable altitudes.
The idle crows had to reconsider their routes.

Of course, multi-apartment houses resulted from the work of all the above listed, as well as not mentioned structures and units of the SMP, but we, the bricklayers, were the arrowhead in the advancement towards the realization of the everlasting dream of mankind about normal living conditions.

It’s not easy to be the arrowhead.
Neither the walls of the offices, nor the glass of the cabins, nor the boards of the hulls hide you from whims of calamitous weather.
All your protection – a spetzovka, a cap, and boots, in the winter a pea jacket and a hat will be added, any part of you not covered with them becomes a prey to the scorching sun, whipping rains, ruthless whirlwinds, and merciless frosts. 
Not everyone will stand, not everyone will bear to remain a bricklayer day after day.

I have worked with lots of different people both in the SMP-615 and beyond it, but these twelve will forever remain for me ‘our team': 
Mykola Khizhnyak – the foreman;
two Peters—Lysoon and Kyrpa—bricklayers;
two Gregories—Gregoryevich and just Grynya, handled Melekhov (after the serial of the ‘Quiet Flows the Don' on the central television)—bricklayers; 
two Andreyevnas—Lyubov and Anna—bricklayers; 
Lyda and Vitta—bricklayers;
Vera Sharapova and Katerina—riggers;
Sehrguey Ogoltsoff—a bricklayer.

In Konotop it's easy to see the apartment block built by our team from other buildings because of ours are striped. 
Starting the walls of a floor, we laid the perimeter belt of red brick (6x12x25cm) courses.
The mark ‘KK’ on the brick stretcher stood for ‘Konotop Brick’, instead of ‘Factory’ there followed ‘I’, or ‘II’ or ‘III’ showing at which shift was it produced.

When the belt courses reached the height of windowsills we switched to laying the pillars between the windows of white silicate bricks (9x12x25cm) of unmarked origin.
The pillars were bridged with concrete cross-pieces delivered up by the tower crane.
The final courses over the cross-pieces were also of red bricks.
Now, looking from aside, another floor was ready (red-white-red), yet now all goes as swiftly as a fairy tale is told… 

It's time to start the ‘filling', to raise the inner walls – the load-bearing axial one, aka ‘the capital', and the transverse ones partitioning the blocks of different entrances and one apartment from another within the same block. 
The partitions between the rooms and corridors in an apartment were laid of gypsum plates (8x40x80cm).
The toilet-bathroom compartments were also of red bricks (and only red because silicate ones, like gypsum, do not withhold moisture) laid shiner-way.

Only then the floor can be bridged over with the concrete slabs delivered by the tower crane on four tight steel cables which the riggers Katerina and Vera Sharapova hooked from the stacks on the ground.
Each slab has four iron loops for the hooks, each slab's length is 5.6 meter, but the width may vary, it's one meter or 1.2 meters. 

The difference in slabs’ width is dictated by the need to fit them accurately between the staircase walls of different entrances because a slab should not overlap the staircase wall in which the kitchen ventilation ducts are laid out.

And if the slabs brought to the site are all of the same widths?

(...the era of planned economy and deficits taught not to be too picky – take what turns up, while at least that is available…)

And now in the slab stacks around the site, there is nothing to choose from, what then? 
It’s also no problem!
There is a breaker, a sled hammer, two Peters, two Gregories, one Seryoga and the foreman Mykola – passing each other the tool, they will bring the slab to the needed width. 

Bridging the floor is a crucial moment, my first year in the team I was not honored with that responsibility.

The crane puts the slab onto two load-bearing walls: the outer and the axial (the capital) ones,  bridging them.
The foreman together with a trusted bricklayer lay down with their stomachs across the slab and hang their heads below it to check how it fits in the series of the previously installed ones because the slabs' concrete bellies would be the ceiling in the apartment. 
If needed, the crane would take the slab up and aside for mortar to be added onto a wall, or maybe scraped off.
After all, we build for people who will come to live here!

Finally, the exacting peeps of two hanging heads are satisfied with how the slab fits the evenness of the bridging and the foreman cries out the long-awaited words:
‘They’ll eat it up!’
Which means the future tenants would be happy with the quality of the construction works in their homes.

The crane relaxes the taut cables, the hooks are released from the holes with loops on both ends of the installed slab. 
The crane boom rises and turns aside, carrying away its huge block with the massive hook from which hang the four slings with four smaller hooks on their ends – the so-called ‘spider'. 

With the rumble and din of its open-work iron tower, the crane rolls along the crane track to the slab stack on top of which Katerina and Vera Sharapova are waiting all ready to pull the ‘spider's' hooks through the loops in the next slab holes. 
The technology has been verified by the decades of application...

In the morning at half past seven the workforce of the SMP-615 gathered at the station square waiting for their colleagues to arrive by the first local train arriving through Bachmach, Khalimonovo, Khutor Khalimonovo and Kukolka stations and come up in the stream of the passengers flowing around the corner of the mighty two-story building of the Konotop railway station. 
And then, all together, we started to wait for our bus.

We formed a wide circle, not for a dance but for idling the time exchanging the news, jokes or just looking around to make comments on the life in the station square. 
There was practically no traffic in it and only other circles from other organizations, but ours was the widest and jolliest. 

(…in a circle the is something of a family, the incipient rudiments of a community.
Standing in a circle you see more human faces than when lined-up in the ranks…)

Finally, from the Club Street our bus appeared, our ‘seagull’, handled so after the ‘Seagull’ brand cars meeting the government delegations at Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow.

It slowly crossed the tram tracks and passed the one-story structure of the railway militia station in the corner of the square then under the taxi stop sign on the lamp pillar, though, for some reason, no taxi ever appeared under it.
At the end of its triumphal circling around the square, the bus would stop next to our jolly circle and slam its automatic doors open. 

From the square the bus would take us past the the Loony, past School 12, past the tramway depot, to the In-Seven-Winds, where our team would get off near the 110-apartment block site and the bus would go further, for another half a kilometer or so, taking the rest of its passengers to the vast grounds of the SMP-615 bordered by the white brick wall.
However, not all of our team workers came by the ‘seagull’, most of them lived in the 50-apartment block or in the hostel barracks, also the In-Seven-Winds, and they arrived on foot.

We changed clothes in the trailer made of long horizontal boards painted brown.
One half of the tiny vestibule was filled with a bunch of dead-mortar crust-covered shovels leaning against the wall over the dented tin pails out of which stuck the handles of our trowels and hammers and hanged coils of the plumb bob whitish line lengths.
The inner door of the vestibule opened to a low room with one window and two sets of narrow lockers in its both ends.
Most of the room was occupied with the box of asbestos-cement plates covering electric entrails of the heater.

The team women dressed in the trailer of the oversees.
Unlike ours, it had big wheels which called for the high front porch under its door.
The oversees’ trailer had tin siding and two windows because there were two compartments in it – one for the current oversee and plumb bunches of the blueprint drawings of the object in progress, and the other for the team women.

At night two pensioner-watchmen, alternately, slept in the oversees’ compartment.
One of them, by the brave name of Rogov, wore a pesha tunic with order-and-medal straps, an officer's belt, riding breeches and boots of chrome leather, and on his head a khaki cloth cap in the fashion of the 30's, like that of Marshal Zhukov when he was still a brigade commander. 
From under the long cloth, visor looked the face of a veteran Roman legionary, worn out in campaigns and full of resentment at the head of Konotop pension fund.
The sentiment rooted in the accidentally overheard words of that public service worker addressed to his deputy concerning Rogov on a visit to their office.
‘Patience, colleague, they’re not already so too many around.’

The second watchman was dressed in civilian clothes, but earlier he wore the uniform of a militiaman and arranged sadistic tests for tipsy mujiks: if they could pronounce the words ‘Jawaharlal Nehru' he would let them go, otherwise, they were taken to the sobering-up station. 

(...Konotop is Konotop and there even a mere militiaman knows the name of the first president of India…)

When on his turn, the former militiaman sealed the window in the oversees’ compartment with a sheet of cardboard from within.
Otherwise, he could not fall asleep. 
In his youth, he served in the troops fighting Bandera men and the windows in their barracks were closed for the night with shields of thick planks so that the repose of servicemen would not be disturbed with guerrillas grenades through the window glass... 

After donning the spetzovka robes, the entire team collected to the men bricklayers trailer to exchange the news of the In-Seven-Winds, the hostel barracks, and the SMP-615 itself. 
Yes, sometimes Gregory Gregorovich would start bulldozing Grinya that at 8.00 he should stand at the line, chink his trowel and lay a brick upon another.
Then Grinya grunted with a chuckle and answered:
‘Very truly!’
Until the mortar was brought to the site and hauled by the crane to the line, bricklayers had nothing to do there.

The mortar was brought to the site by a dump truck.
It would reverse over the rows of empty sheet-iron boxes and raise its dump for the mortar to crawl down the steep slope, but it would not drop into the boxes completely. 
And it’s a good news if at least half of it fell out of the dump.

Firstly, on the way from the mortar-concrete unit, the mortar had grown dense squeezing water out from the solution and it was that water to fall down into the boxes on the ground.
And secondly, the dump floor and sides are not smooth anymore, but covered with the growing crust of frozen upon frozen upon frozen mortar from the previous deliveries.

That's why it's necessary to climb the tailgate hanging off. 
It would swing under your foot in its hinges.
The other foot should be rested on the dump side for the stability. 
Now cut the dense mortar with your shovel so that it slides into a heap over the boxes.
When the cut-off layer of mortar pours in the boxes the truck dump would give a vigorous jerk-and-quake when relieved of the load. 
Keeping your balance at this point is of vital importance.  

The dump truck would go leaving behind a hillock of mortar on 4 or 5 boxes.
But that’s wrong because each bricklayer is supposed to have a separate box
Katerina and Vera Sharapova restore the justice with their shovels.

Although each box has four hook loops in its structure yet the riggers hook the boxes by only two, diagonally, so that the crane would haul the mortar for two bricklayers in one go. 

The part of the wall that’s being laid by team is called ‘the seizure’.
A string, aka the shnoorka, is stretched from end to end of the seizure. 
Shnoorka is a thick fishing line smeared at places with stuck dry mortar, tied in knots where a strike of an incautious trowel had cut it, giving rise to reproving exclamations from among the bricklayers: 
‘What bastard again?’
The shnoorka is the tool for maintaining the right direction and level of the course of bricks. 

To the right of a bricklayer, the crane leaves a box, aka banka, with a load of mortar. 
The boxful of mortar is not exceedingly large – just a quarter of a ton. 
When it’s over the crane takes the banka-box to the riggers for refilling from the remaining heap of mortar.

When the boxed mortar loses its elasticity, simply add water brought in a crumpled pail from the multi-ton container put nearby behind the line and mix it with the shovel.
That’s why a shovel handle sticks out from each box.

However, the main purpose of the shovel is to put the mortar from the box onto your part of the seizure.
Then the shovel returns to its sticking position in the box and the bricklayer spreads the mortar brought onto the wall with the trowel which is the size of a large kitchen knife only with a triangular spade instead of the blade.

To the left of a bricklayer, there's put a pallet of bricks, 3-4 hundred pieces, stacked in dense rows on top of each other. 
Snatching a brick from the upper row, a bricklayer lays it upon the spread mortar and tap-taps with the tin-clad end of the trowel handle, to level with the line of the stretched shnoorka.

When laying the course calls for a bond with a brick of special size—a half, a three-quarter, or, the smallest, a one-fourth piece—a bricklayer’s hammer is put to use for cutting off the excess.
With the bricks on the pallet finished off the crane operator delivers another one hooked by Katerina and Vera Sharapova from among the of pallets stacked on the ground.

The rhythmic change of linked movements – bending, stretching, tilting, knocking – turns the labor process, taking into account its outdoor nature, into a real aerobics sprinkled with a pinch of weightlifting.
Looped motion, consistently ordered, you could even call it spiraling.
Do you follow?

And now spit in the eye of that pathetic bullshit and forget it, because the construction site is not a circus with evenly smoothed sand in its arena.

The construction site is a dangerous zone, where protruding pieces of rebar ambush in half-dark nooks, a seemingly firm board breaks off under the foot, and a pail of boiling tar falls from the roof and lucky you if the warning yell ‘run!' makes you jump aside without gaping up: what's there? 

It is the place, where a cast-iron radiator of heating hits the ground by the wall hurled from a window on the fourth floor by a recidivist that recently returned to live among people after another stretch at the zone. 
He did not aim at anyone in person and threw it just so without even looking out, to check who God would send it on. 
On the whole, the construction site could be compared to life itself and there, as in life, one must not only live but also survive. 
Excuse for falling back into the pathetic rut. 
Still, it’s worth mentioning that the bricklayers are not robots but mere humans.
And humans, being cornered properly enough, would take your dear life to save the life of theirs…
That is… er… what I was about?. 
Ah, yes! The construction site.

At the construction site, there's no time for a bricklayer to plunge into interpretations of esoteric messages from the initiated to the chosen, neither for the deciphering of signs drawn by the motion of ever-changing clouds. 
Wait for a smoke break and then play with symbol-shuffling at your heart content. 
Until the foreman Mykola would rise the shnoorka for the following course and yell along the seizure line: 
‘Off we drive!’
And Peter Lysoon would respond:
‘What? To attack again? And which direction is your ‘forward’?
And that means – grab your shovel and start to live on.

(...a couple of centuries before, on the border with England, or maybe, conversely, with Scotland, there lived a farmer earning plenty of dough without any charlatanism whatsoever.
His specialty was those mentally crazed. 
On the condition that their loving relatives were not around at the time of treatment.
So, they brought to him such, say, a challenged, who had already drilled into the brains of all of his household members with his special vision of the world in which he was a teapot.
‘Oh, look out! I’m of porcelain! Don’t break me up!’
And the following morning the farmer would take the teapot out into a field together with odd items from other services – crystal wine glasses, or saltcellars with their lids lost, and, occasionally, costume jewelry turned up as well – and carefully harnessed the whole company into the plow. 
And then, of course, plowed the field.

By the evening of the day, 88% of the glass containers recollected their origin and made comments on his mistakes in attitude towards human beings.
On the second day, the most stubborn pressure cookers began to pretend being human too and the farmer returned to the family and society their fully restored members.
For the stipulated fee, sure thing, plus bonus of the field cultivated by unpaid workforce…)

Eera did not believe in labor therapy in the open air, she had more confidence in folk remedies.
That winter she took me to to the sorcerer in the district center of Ichnya of the Chernigov region.
We arrived there in the evening amid the early thickening winter twilight.
There was about half an hour before the bus departure back and the local kids, with some kind of pride, directed us to the sorcerer’s hutta.

The door was opened by a common-looking rural woman.
In the kitchen there was a pair of visitors, but not from our bus, I would have remembered them.
Maybe from the neighborhood.
A young couple with the appearance of the newlywed.
Both were seated, the man busy with eating borsch, and she, like overseeing. 
Not quite the right time for borsch consuming, but I did not intervene – maybe the sorcerer prescribed the medication.

The woman led Eera to the next room and two minutes later they came back together with the sorcerer.
A black-haired man about fifty in a khaki shirt from an army parade crap.
We looked at each other unblinkingly and he returned to his room with Eera.
I stayed with the borsch-eater and the two women.
Soon Eera came back all excited and we left for the bus.

On our way to Nezhin, Eera shared that I was the way I was because they fed a ‘giving’ to me, and there occurred an overdose,  but it was useless to treat me on that very day since it was a wrong ‘quarter’, that is the moon was not in the right phase.
(Or could they run out of the borsch?)
The sorcerer said I did not need to come on a visit anymore and should be represented by a blood relative. 
So, instead of me, my sister Natasha a couple of times went with Eera to the district center of Ichnya.

(...it’s a commonplace knowledge that a ‘giving’ is a love potion used by a female to make you fall in love with her.
The target of the charm is treated to something edible spiced with a bit of her menstrual bleeding.
Anyway, it was the fair sex to start experiments of human beings…)

I have no trust in any charms, or spells and so on, but when you chink your trowel on a brick or turn the mortar with the shovel, your head remains basically free and lots of things can slowly twirl in there. 

(...if, purely hypothetically, suppose that the ‘giving' had, after all, taken place, then – who, where, when? 
I do not remember in which of the years of my work at the SMP-615, two assumptions turned up in my head:
1) the sore milk, which Maria brought for me when I was treated in the Nezhin city hospital for the principle’s sake;
2) the boiled sausage I was fed with by my course-mate Valya with black eyebrows meeting on her nose bridge during our joint school practice at the station of Nosovka, although I was not really hungry. 

However, since I had not fallen in love with any of them, the hypothesis fails miserably, the Ichnya sorcerer gets zero points and remains on the bench of charlatans…)

When Gaina Mikhailovna, lowering her eyes asked carefully what attitude they had towards me, in our team, I could easily see what wind she was trimming her sails to. 
That meant – how do they tolerate my wet reputation?

Yes, it should be admitted that not every collective would accept in its ranks someone with higher education for a position not corresponding to their diploma.
Here lies the explanation to the yell from the bottom of Vasya’s heart, the fastener at the New Dophinovka mine:
‘You disgrace our mine with your diploma!’
That is, – ‘you turn it into some worthless rabble’.

My reputation at the SMP-615 was spoiled by the cashier Komos.
She knew that I studied in Nezhin and got the diploma.
Her daughter Alla once had a long, serious relationship with my brother Sasha, I even visited the Komoses in their apartment during that period. 
But later Alla cut her marvelous long hair too short, and my brother became the Acceptee to Lyuda with her mother... 

The cashier Komos gave us our payment.
For that event, our ‘seagull' bus was taking the workers from the construction sites to the SMP-615 base grounds and in the lobby on the first floor of the administrative building we lined to the small square window in the wall. 
The payment was given after standing in the excited line of workmen, then bending and putting your head into the opening of the window low in the wall and signing the paysheet.
I just did not like that final position.
Your head is somewhere there, not quite clear where, and the back sticks out to the mercy and at the discretion of the excited line...

When I reached the window, I did not bent, but simply pulled the sheet closer—on the window ledge—and signed it.
Moreover, since Komos saw that it was I who came up.
Then she cried out from behind the glass:
‘Seryozha! And where is the head?’
‘I was guillotined.’
‘What? Don’t show off! Having a diploma does not make you above anything else! You’ve come to visit us with your Olga. And we have drunk moonshine together!’

One thing that I do not like is a self-indulgent familiarity.
That’s why I gave Komos the cashier a direct reply:
‘You are wrong! At your place, we drank birch sap and medical alcohol, and there was no moonshine at all!' 

In general, put her to the place where she belonged. 
But she still gave me my payment and there was enough to return Tonya the 25 rubles that she lent me for flowers when you were at the maternal hospital.
Till then it somehow did not work out at all to collect the sum.

In general, because of the talkative cheek of the cashier, I never managed to hide from our team the fact of my diploma.
However, they did not apply any special discrimination because of it, and after about four years I even screwed up on my spetzovka jacket the ‘float-badge', of those that they hand out along with your diploma.
I just thought: why should it kick off in the sideboard?
So I took it and screwed up.
In the summer, naturally.

It had a pretty look – a rhomboid badge of tender blue enamel with a golden book in it on the sunburnt black cotton of my spetzovka jacket. 
For more than a month I walked around the site with it.
And then one morning I opened the locker – the spetzovka hung in its place but the badge had gone, only the hole remained in the jacket.
But that was not by ours, then a lot of people were sent to the site for the accomplishment period...

So, on my next visit to Nezhin I gave my mother-in-law a quite predictable answer:
‘Gaina Mikhailovna, ten people from our team have a good attitude to me, and one person entertains a positive one.’
‘How do you know?’
‘I conducted the survey. Oral, and separately, of course.’
‘And how did you ask: “What’s your attitude to me?”’

(...an interesting question, eh?
Where else would I get those figures from?
By the way, one of the asked then also asked:
‘And what’s your attitude to me?’…)

Yes, life turned upside down: I had been used to go from Nezhin to Konotop on weekends, but now from Konotop to Nezhin.

On Fridays after work by a local train to Nezhin; on Mondays by 6.00 train to Konotop.
Three times I overslept that 6.00 local and started to go back in the evening on Sundays.
I was afraid that being late would affect my place in the queue for an apartment.

(...when there was Negro slavery in America, some of the Afro-American families were divided.
Say, the husband was slavering on the plantation of one master and his wife was several miles away on the plantation of another one.
On holidays her husband was visiting her.
Such a woman was called his ‘broad wife’.
When I learned that I regretted that I knew English so deeply it scratched me, I don’t know why, but I got really upset...)

Because there were no trams in Nezhin the passenger buses became overly stuck-up. 
The tin plates on special posts at every bus stop were telling with black on yellow at what exactly time bus number this or that should pull up by but reading those plates would only aggravate frustration. 

According to the tin-table, no less than three Bus 5 should have already passed the stop while you were still waiting for at least a single one. 
At last! It appeared in the distance instilling hope that …
No, it passed by without stopping because was jam-packed to the utmost...

However, that night Eera and I were lucky.
The moment we reached the bus stop it was approached by a bus. 
It was a Saturday night and we walked out because Twoic invited me to play Preferans at his place.

He was already a last-year student and did not live in the hostel but renting a flat somewhere, so we arranged to meet at the main square.
From the Red Partisans street to the main square there were just two bus stops and we would go on foot but for that bus turned up.
Eera would hold on to my arm, so as not to slip in her high wedge boots on the firmly trampled snow with bright white circles on it in the cones of light under the lamp pillars. 

When we were dressing in the bedroom, Eera asked me to pass her the belt from her frock – a long strap of fabric.
Because the bedroom was so narrow and I did not want to squeeze between the bed and your carriage, I just threw the belt to her.
However, one of its ends I kept in my hand in case she did not catch it.
Eera, not following my actions after her request, bent down to zip up her boots and the other end of the belt swept over her bowed back.

I was astonished how exactly that moment replicated the frame in ‘The Gypsy’ movie when Budulie hit his wife with a whip going away to the war.
However, Eera had not noticed anything and I consoled myself with the thought that I was not a gypsy and it was not a war anyway. 

When the bus pulled up on the square, there had already accumulated such a crowd at the stop that even two buses would not be enough.

I got off first and stretched out my hand to Eera to help her go down.
No sooner had she been on the stop than the crowd rushed to storm the bus doors.
However, I managed to fence Eera behind my back.
And then some girl shrieked out, almost getting run over in the stampede.
The last moment she grabbed onto the bus door and did not fall under the crowd pouring up the steps.

As a man not only noble but also gallant, I thought it was absolutely wrong, especially in the presence of my wife, and I shouted to the girl over the mass streaming between us apologizing for all that: 
‘I am sorry!’
Someone in the crowd did not want to be inferior in gallantry to me and, concluding it was I who pushed her, hit me on the cheekbone. 
Or maybe he knew that a fact of violation must be followed by a fact of punishment. 

And then I pronounced loudly—and the crowd around seemed for a moment forgot about the bus and turned back to my response and even the full moon stood still to hear the words: 
‘With all my nonresistance I cannot bear that!’
And I responded with a blow to the blow.

Probably, he was not alone there, or the guys from the embittered crowd had at once turned into a close-knit pack, but there poured blows at me from all the sides – they found a scapegoat to splash out their wrath because of the life injustice. 

All I could do was to cover my face and head with my arms bent in elbows, but, in my opinion, the protective stance was executed by my body itself, without my participation.
I, personally, only could hear some unintelligible yells.
Who to whom?
What about?

When there sounded the growling of the started engine, I somehow was already on the other side from the bus in the cross-light of the street lamps surrounding the square, but still on my feet, although bareheaded. 
Probably, there were too many of the enraged and they hindered each other to knock me down on the flatten out snow of the square.
The pack ran off to catch the door from slamming on the other side.

The bus left and I returned to the stop, where, among a dozen of passengers who had not managed to squeeze in, Eera stood with my rabbit fur hat in her hands. 
Further on, in the shadow of the dark news stall there loomed Twoic who had come to meet us...

He took us to his flat which he rented together with Petyunya Rafalofsky and I played one pool with them.
Then they went out to see off Eera and me.

The narrow sidewalk allowed for only two persons to go along side by side and Eera was in the first pair walking together with Twoic.
He wore a long sheepskin coat and a furry hat-malakhai giving him a look of a bear beside Eera in a coat of straight cut and closely fitting knitted hat.
I was walking behind with Petyunya and felt unbearable bitterness because she was not with me.
But what could I do? To kick up a scene of jealousy? To pull her away from Twoic’s side?
Then who was I?
Hooey-pricker in the demi-season coat from Alesha Ocheret, freshly from under the kicking herd in the square.
No one would want to have such a one by her side, even if she were your own wife.
They did not really manage to hurt me in the recent skirmish, but how painful it was to walk along with Petyunya now! 

He and Twoic saw us to the square and then down the street to the bridge by the hostel where we finally managed to part.
For a goodbye, Twoic averting his look from me and taking often drugs at his cigarette expounded on how he recently had one of his biofac sluts and she embraced his waist with her legs while he was dragging her around the room lifted by her tits in the grip of his hands.
That self-advertising of a male winner really shocked me.
I would never share such shit in presence of even those sluts of his.
That Twoic was just a dirty mudak.

When we went on towards Red Partisans, Eera never put her hand on to my arm and kept silent.
I just had to shut up as well.
There is no reward in apologizing to unfamiliar girls...

The management of SMP-615 found a way to at least partially smooth out the fact of keeping around a bricklayer with a diploma.
I was appointed one of the assessors at the Comradely Court. 

Such a court considers offenses not included in the articles of the criminal code, or if envisaged there then not breached to the excess; some petty vandalism, or theft of trifles.
The Comradely Court was rather a means of moral restricting than a punishment in all the severity of the law.
The position of that court assessor was not paid and bestowed by the election.
However, it’s not always possible to draw a clear border between election and appointment.
When at the trade union meeting, the question ‘Who’s for?’ sounds as not a question to those present, but simply serves a signal for them to raise their hands.
A classic example of a secondary reflex, as demonstrative as by a Pavlov’s dog.

Exactly the same reflexology as at the Komsomol meetings.
Actually, in all the period of my working at SMP-615, there occurred just one such meeting caused by a visit of an inspector from the City Komsomol Committee. 

It’s unlikely that he came to the hall on the second floor of the SMP-615 administrative building on his own accord, he sooner was charged to check how high the life was running among enthusiastic youth under the age of 28 among the construction workforce.
He was so utterly depressed by a complete disinterestedness in even the most pressing issues of our time, that at the end of the meeting, catastrophically swift in rolling down to its end, he turned with a question to the present:
‘Why are you so passive?’
Then I had to get up and answer his question with a rhetorical one:
‘And who, I wonder, would the active lead if there were no passive ones?’
Still, the diploma obliged you to follow a certain line of conduct.
The inspecting functionary was unprepared for answering the counter-question and the meeting safely closed... 

So, the SMP-615 management decided that they would pay a proper tribute to the higher education system of our land when I, a carrier of a diploma for such education, was made an assessor in the comradely court. 
The court itself required one chairman and two assessors for the period of one year, until the next report-and-election meeting of the trade union.

It seems, at that position I proved to be a latent tyrant, proposing overly draconian punishments to the offenders.
For example, a month of solitary (sic!) correctional labor for the plasterer Trepetilikha in the far northern parts of the SMP-615 grounds. 
Whereas, for her, a day was lost if on the bus route from the station to the In-Seven-Winds she would not yackety-yack a couple of colleagues to a coma! 

Of course, from the SMP-615 production building (the place of the supposed correctional labor) to the Checkpoint house by the entrance gate there was a distance of merely 200 meters.
The Checkpoint house was the seat of Svaitsikha the watchwoman, whose tongue also was in no need of oiling. 
However, the court did not heed my proposal and sentenced Trpetilikha to be removed for three months from the position of the forewoman of plasterers team, which meant a ten-rubles cut in payment for each penalty month. 

Anyway, she got off easily because her offense could even have a political resonance.
The trial revealed the following chain of events:
Trepetilikha leaned out of a window in 110-apartment block and saw that the accountant of the SMP-615 was going home.
Well, and why not go?
She lived in the In-Seven-Winds area and it took her about ten minutes of a leisurely stroll to get home from the SMP-615 administrative building.
And the time was already twenty to five.
Her mistake was that she answered the question of Trepetilikha drooping out of the window:
‘Well, well, and what’s there to be carried?’
She meant the plastic bag in the hands of the passer-by.
‘Fish,' answered the dimwit of an accountant. 

The word ‘fish’ worked as the detonator.
Trepetilikha went to pieces, collected the women of her plasterers' team and, with prolonged intonations, informed them on the unfair distribution of life's good's, despite the era of developed socialism. 
‘They're sitting there in the offices! Made them warm and cozy! An electric heater under each bitch's asshole! And we a getting stiff with the cold! And when it's fish, it's for them? 
Enough, girlfriends! Collect your spats and hawks! Yes, and even so brazenly replying: ‘It’s fish I've got.’ But we have no families?!’

The fact is that our ‘seagull’ bus at times brought food from the ORS.
Once, when we were on the 110-apartment block they brought fresh buns, and on the 100-apartment block, it was mineral water in glass bottles of 0.5 liters. 
When and what was meted out in the administrative building of the SMP-615 I do not know, but the following day the women of Trepetilikha’s team did not start working and that, from whatever viewpoint, was a strike.

I do not know whether they had brought them fish or some other equivalent, but the finishing work was, after all, continued and Trepetilikha stood before the court.
That is, our comradely court.
The SMP-615 management could not turn a blind eye to the fact of idle time with a political lining to it, especially as the deputy chief technologist wore a tie with the image of a sickle and hammer.
And it says a lot.

Yes, my cloth scarf bore a pattern of a Kremlin tower on top of the five Olympic Rings and the inscription ‘Moscow-80’, but I had nothing to choose from while the neckties at the Department Store were fairly diverse: crisscrossed, striped, and even with pea-spots...

After mature contemplating, it seems to me that by rejecting my proposal to transfer Trepetilikha to the SMP-615 base, the comradely court made a wise decision.
Keeping her there would tantamount to playing with fire on top of a powder keg.
Had they brought there something of which she did not get a share she'd blow up the whole base. 

‘There are certain women in the settlements of Russia...’

Without false modesty, I should note that in the villages of Konotop regions one can come across even more cool females, whose potential could be measured only in megatons, and even by the Richter scale.
‘Phui! What brazen folks I have to get along with! Assaulted me with the whole of the village out! I had barely managed to bark them off!’

And the welder Volodya Shevtsov would even get exiled had the court played along with my proposal. 
He was a very professional welder having worked for twenty years at the KEMZ Plant and there was some kind of hereditary intelligence about him.
Maybe that’s why he was drinking like a fish.
When looking at his crisp curly hair, I somehow had associations with the city on the Neva.
There was some intelligentsia flair in Volodya… something from the white nights of Petetown… the Peterhof fountains…
But got tanked up as any other boozer especially on a payday.

At the court session its chairman described the case as follows:
‘We get to the station square after work and by reaching the first traffic lights from there Volodya manages to get plastered in full.’
Well, it was he who slept: from the station to the traffic light by the Under-Overpass there were two delis plus “The Meeting’ bar.

Then I suggested sending Volodya to exile.
To some countryside where no traffic lights were hanging, with their satanic wink, and Volodya would have no reason to booze until he’s steaming.

The court rejected such an inhumanity and Volodya himself took offense at me, also he did not show it.
And that’s a pity, he was so classically refined.
‘If you would like to go and fuck yourself, please?’
And you as if feel with your skin the breeze from the seafront of our cultural capital...


The SMP-615 was based in Konotop, but it had several branches operating at other places: a pair of jacks in Kiev, a construction team and a truck crane in Bakhmach, a team with a ‘Belarus’ tractor in Vorozhba…

The third case was that of the overseer from the Bakhmach team.

They finished somewhat building and were leveling the adjacent area with a bulldozer borrowed from a local organization.
The overseer noticed that a pile of earth was being moved onto a defective bridging slab left over after the building completion.
So he took the slab into the yard of his friend or relative, to cover the earth-cellar pit.
The construction object was safely completed and then some rat reported the plunder of the socialist property.

At that court session I had only one question to the criminal:
‘What would happen to the cracked slab were it not taken to cover the earth-cellar?’
He shrugged discontentedly and replied:
‘Would be buried in the ground. What else?’

I demanded to declare public gratitude to the foreman for his contribution to raising the general welfare of the Soviet people.
It did not matter who was whose relative, but all of us were one united family.
Due to the general monotony of life, that proposal was neglected too.

At the next year report-election trade union meeting, no one mentioned my name for election to the Comradely Court. 
As if I had never had that f-f.. fully worked off diploma in my life...

When you turned one year old you came on a visit to Konotop.
Briefly, for a week or two.
That summer there were frequent thunderstorms.
After one of them, I drove you in the carriage for a walk. 
My mother and Eera had long opposed it, but I did not want to sit in the house and wait for the next rainfall.
Finally, Eera allowed our going out and they went back to sleep; people grow sleepy in the rain.

There were lots of large puddles all over the road, but you and I still managed to make a circle through almost all of the Settlement – from the tram terminal to the Bogdan Khmelnitsky street and back along the Professions street.
You were adequately dressed and sleeping under the buckled apron and the raised hood of the carriage. 
Only at the end of the Professions street, when the rubber tire fell off the front right wheel of the carriage, you woke and sat up and grabbed the tire which I had placed over the buckled apron. 
You grabbed it with your both hands as if it was a steering wheel, but I took away that wet and mud-stained piece of rubber. 
You whimpered a little, then hushed but never went to sleep again.
The Decemberists street was not far away already and we reached there on just hind wheel pair of the carriage... 

Then the weather cleared and in a couple of days I took you out to the field near the tram terminal.
I got you out of the carriage and put on the green grass.
You were not too firm on your legs then and just stood with your hand leaning against the carriage side. 
I lay down in the grass next to you.
The green field slanted upward into the blue sky, and larks were singing from up there.
So loud, joyful.
You stood there until on your red pantyhose appeared a dark patch of moisture.
I had to take you back home because pampers had not been invented yet...

Another time I took a spare pantyhose and drove you to the pond of Shapovalovka, which Kuba and I had been visiting on our bicycles.
It’s not too far, five kilometers or so.
You slept all the way.

The pond of Shapovalovka was rather big.
I stopped the carriage on a low sandy beach to watch what would be your reaction to an unfamiliar world.
You had not seen any ponds yet.
It’s like the first walk-out from a spaceship to an unknown planet.

You woke and sat up, left on your own with something you've never seen in a lifetime.
I stood behind the raised hood, so as not to interfere with the first impressions. 

You turned to the left – only the wide water surface was seen from your place. 
And on the right, too, there was an incomprehensible substance, and you burst into tears. 

Of course! Waking up in the middle of who knows what and all alone.
I had to show up and we rolled back...

The cloth line at the 13 Decemberists street was stretched from the gate to the front porch.
Dry clothes were hanging on it and under them, you were sitting in your carriage. 
My mother stood next to it with the basin in her hands, she was collecting the dried washing.
You suddenly seized on something hanging by your side and rose in the carriage standing in all your height. 
My mother told me to remove the baby and you, in a way of response, threw both your hands up, as if in a dance.
Look how big I am and what I can do already!
Something so dark and eerie flashed through my mother’s eyes that I instinctively pulled you back.

Rather, I pulled on the handle of the carriage and by that move, I yanked its bottom from under your feet. 
You tumbled over its edge on the ground.
The ground was, luckily, soft and you landed, fortunately, on your back.
I at once picked up you crying at the top of your lungs, but Eera was already rushing from the garden in panther leaps to pound her fists on my head and the shoulders because my hands were occupied holding you...

The local train taking you back to Nezhin was overcrowded.
The passengers were standing in the aisle in one thick mass and even in the passages between the bench-seats by the windows.
When I had to take your plastic potty to the toilet in the car vestibule, I kept it over my head like a waiter's tray in a crowded tavern... 

(...in my memory, I keep two sets of pictures which can be easily retrieved for consideration in their detail. 
The first set is a collection of apocalyptic pictures where there is the howling darkness, fleeing crowds and cold horror.
The second one contains nice heart-warming pics, but they wake up a longing for something unreachable, or unfulfilled. 
Like that view through the open door of the bus pulled up near Vapnyarka and there is a thin concrete post with a blue tin square at its top numbered 379 and next to it a narrow gap for a country road between the walls of ripening wheat stopped in their motion and from the road a boy of ten keeps up his hand over his wheat-color-haired head to wave goodbye to the departing bus…

I mean to say that all the pictures with you in them are from the second set…)

After coming back from Odessa, I lived in a state of constant fit of panic, in agonizing fear of what had to inevitably happen and possibly had already happened.
The fear was accompanied by jealousy of not someone specifically but about the fact that he would take my Eera from me.
I kept the torturing fear concealed as something shameful but it was always by me. 

The torment eased only when Eera was nearby when I was slaving at a construction site or worked at the translation of another story.
But even then the anxiety pressing me all the time did not disappear wholly but only receded into the background.
Physical pain is more merciful – the part of the brain where its signals are directed after a while is turned off and the pain no longer reaches you.

I did not attempt to alleviate my situation.
Firstly, because I never learned to analyze and make up plans for actions, I just live silently enduring the unbearable. 
Secondly, the alternative to that agony was no less horrible than the agony itself...

Our team was sent to the local train stop ‘Pryseymovye’ by the bridge over the Seim river with the task of building a 2-apartment cottage for the track-men and their families.
We worked there about a fortnight.

At one of the midday breaks, I spread my spetzovka on the grass and lay down next to the sun-scorched path with the ants bustling along the cracks in its surface. 
For passing time at midday breaks I read ‘Vsesvit’, a monthly thick magazine received on subscription.
It printed Ukrainian translations from the world literature of all times and peoples.
Soon I got tired of reading and put my head on a page of the open magazine.

It was a sunny day around filled to the brim with busy summer life.
The ants were dragging something along the cracked path, under the rare gusts of a cooling breeze, the tall grass swayed carrying the trembling shadows of leaves in the trees above it.
The air was filled with the unending buzz of horseflies, bees, and just flies. 
From time to time the breeze lazily raised the page next to the one on which my head lay and then everything around got screened off with whiteness and blurry spots of letters brought too close to the pupil.

The risen page effaced the piers of the bridge across the river and the long spit of an empty sand island washed up by the unruly current.
And the fisherman with a long fishing rod standing on the islands also disappeared behind the white blurriness.

Then the page would fall down and the fisherman would appear again standing already in the current up to the ankles of his rubber boots.

The fishing rod got bent by the taut line, he whipped it up and snatched from the turbulent stream the flickering splendor of a caught fish.
The fisherman took it off the hook and threw behind his back on the spit where the fish went on pulsating on the sand.
He threw the baited hook back into the river and, watching the float, did not notice the river gull sneaking up along the sand to the beating of the fish.

Grabbing its prey, the bird flew up.
The fisherman did not see that, neither how another river gull, dived from above the bridge attacking the first one. 
They collided in an air fight and the fish fell from five meters high back into the river.
The fisherman did not see anything of that, he stubbornly followed the float.

It was only I who watched the whole proceeding, but nothing touched me.
I did not even hold the page for uninterrupted watching.
The river and the blur took turns before my eyes and I saw that all of that was Nothing.

All that life full of events and struggling was just a series of pictures on top of Nothing.

I watched, and I could also not watch and nothing would change anything.
Everything was drowned in Nothing.
Even the constantly present pain receded getting flooded with Nothing from which I did not need anything.

I lay stretched like that long spit of sand around which the stream of life hastes murmuring and splashing but we both knew that all that was just the same and absolute Nothing.

That is a terrifying knowledge.
How can you live with it?
How to live on when you do not want anything and do not wait for something?
So the choice I had was not too big – either Eera and the unsubsiding agony or Nothing...

Eera was visiting Konotop without you as well.
For example, for Vladya's wedding when the winter was setting in. 
He was marrying Alla, who already had a child and worked in a large canteen.

The wedding party was held at the same canteen on the outskirts of the city, near the stop of the diesel train to Dubovyazovka. 
The ‘live music’ included the heavily bald Skully and the still curly-haired Chuba.
At times, at the requests of the guests, Vladya also sang with the ex-Orpheuses.
Everything was delicious, loud and fun.

But that was on the second day of Eera's stay, and on the evening of the first day, I made two discoveries. 

The first was about the hidden resources of a human body.

Late in the evening Eera and I went through the veranda to the attached room.
In the winter it was not heated and became just a storeroom of all sorts of household things.
When leaving the kitchen Eera threw over her shoulders some of the jackets from the hanger by the door.
She always liked to try something on.

In the room among the other things there stood a pair of old armchairs, the relics from the Object times, with wooden armrests under yellow varnish and we had a sex.

At such moments I did not think of any agonies…

We seemed to cum together but Eera, with her eyes half-closed, started to moan ‘More! More!.’
Until that moment I knew it for sure that after orgasm you needed to get at least half an hour of rest.
‘Mo-ore!.’

And I got up again and we went on above the freshly spilled semen on the floorboards.

That is impossible but it happens, as it's turned out... 

The second discovery, concerning the white spots in the human conscience, happened when Eera and I returned to the living room.

My father had been already gone to the bedroom and my mother, who felt completely out of sorts that evening, was sitting on the sofa with her hands stretched aside onto its seat without looking at the TV between the two windows. 
Only Lenochka was watching it from her as-yet-unfolded chair-bed.
The light was on only the living room and the TV was quietly murmuring also there.

After a little of groaning, my mother asked me and Eera to help her to the bedroom because she had no strength in her at all.
We took her by the arms from both sides and helped to get up.
With groans and shuffling her slippers on the floor, she, supported by us, moved to the curtained doorway to the dark kitchen.
In that manner, the three of us passed the middle of the room under the chandelier of five white shades of which only one painted a circle of yellowish electric light on the ceiling. 

When there remained just two meters to the doorway, the circle of light suddenly disappeared and I found myself surrounded by the darkness which was not complete because I could discern that I was having a sex with my mother from behind.
The horror shook me like an electric shock and I got back in the living room.
To the doorway to the kitchen, there was still a distance of about one meter. 

I gave Eera a frightened look over the white kerchief on my mother's head.
Eera, with her eyebrows knit together, took care to keep her eyes on the lowered profile of my mother as if she had not noticed anything. 
It was just a vision, but more prolonged than that second of running through the Greek night.

I asked Eera to stop, hurried into the kitchen and turned the light on.
We took my mother to the bedroom and helped to lay down on the bed where my father muttered something in his sleep. 
We returned to the living room.
I laid out the chair-bed for Lenochka and unfolded the sofa for us.

Soon the hutta turned into a sleeping kingdom.
Only the clock on the wall above the TV was ticking against my temples.
It also did not know what was that all and why all that had been happening to me...

Accepting the notebooks with my translations, Zhomnir, as earlier, jerked up his bushy eyebrow and began reading to insert his pencil marks in between widely spaced lines, although he agreed that his options were also not ideal.
‘Your trouble, Sehrguey, is that Ukrainian is not your native tongue, you hadn't absorbed it with your mother's milk.' 
But I refrained from explaining that the first months of my life I was fed with the milk of Carpathian cows. 

He went into his archival chamber and returned with a thin book in his hands.
‘Gutsalo’s stories. That’s how one should write!’
And Zhomnir started to read out excerpt sentences from the book, clicking his tongue at the end of the especially cool ones, then he handed the book to me to learn the craft.

(...I had read that collection and other works by E. Gutsalo.
What can I do if the descriptions of the morning dew chime on cucumber seedlings do not hook me up?
(For that same reason, by the way, I do not like Yesyenin even though he’s from Ryazan region.)
Besides, after ‘The Enchanted Desna’ by Gonchar who had so beautifully exhausted the subject, anyone picking it up anew is doomed to a miserable copying of the flavors and mood.
And when Gutsalo tried his hand at writing on a city life, he moved down to the level of the cartoon magazine ‘Perets’.
I am ready to agree that in one of such stories he presented the reddish brick dust on the black padded jackets of bricklayers, but the noted detail has nothing to do with the plot or characters in the story.
And the detail remained just hanging about like a limp dick in an immense vagina... 

The constituent parts of a work should converge into and develop the whole structure.
The way as the constellation of the Southern Cross and the red hair of the doctor under the lamp on the empty ship deck in the opening paragraphs of ‘The Rain’ by Somerset Maugham, suggestively send the reader down the road to the clash of prostitution and priesthood…)

Yet Zhomnir should know better and I started to fill the shortcomings of milk nutrition in my infancy and eliminate the backwash of skipping the Ukrainian literature lessons at school.

On the cover of a thin copybook, I wrote ‘Ukr. Lit.' and then read all of the books in Ukranian from the two long shelves in the library of the Plant Club. 
There were both Lesya Ukrainka and her mother Olena Bdgilka, and Panas Myrny with his oxen, and the great Kobzar, and Marko Vovchok, and Ivan Franko, and Jankowski (the idol of Zhomnir) and many others in alphabetical order.
About some of them, even Zhomnir knew only from the notes of the overview lectures he had attended in his student years. 

(...sifting all that through the sieve of careful reading, I can safely state that in terms of artistic value most of the authors did not manage to create anything above the level of petty amateurs.
‘Where there is no nightingale, you're left with a sparrow chirrup’, as runs a Ukrainian proverb.
The sparrow-writers remained just re-tellers of the latest European fashion in the belles-lettres. 
That’s great! Glory be to them!
The Ukrainian language began to be seen through the press.
However, that’s politics and I am talking about the literature.

Of the Ukrainian literature only three would pass with their colors flying in front of the world literary standards:
a) poet Kandyba, aka Olyes, who for years had been walking knee-deep in blood at the Kiev slaughterhouse writing the tenderest poems imaginable;
b) writer Vasil Stephanic;
c) writer Les Martović.

The real master knows what he wants to say, because he had what to say, and he knows how to say it. 
The rest of literature aficionados just jingle cowbells in an attempt to portray the new-fashioned waltzes by Herr Strauss, which he creates to the delight and admiration of the decent European public. 
But we will catch up and overtake his orchestra because we’ve got inimitable balalaikas!..)

So after work, I had something to do. 
And a local train can be turned into a passable study.
That’s why on Fridays I went to the In-Seven-Winds with the briefcase and after work, in the train car, I took out of it a thin copybook, a pen, and a volume of stories by Maugham in English.

Stooping over the compact print in a book page, I plunged into the tender humid night of the exotic southern seas, where the fragrance of the jungle in bloom spreads for miles from the islands.
Emerging back from there with a pair of clumsy lines for the copybook, I stacked the prey into the ruled paper cells and dived away again to roam along the sandy beach by water edge with white-crested, even in the dark, waves of the rolling surf and with a start looked through the window of the car… Pryosterny?. So soon?. 
The next is Nezhin.
It was a delicious time.

Writing into a copybook put on top of the briefcase was not comfortable, yet the desk problem found its elegant solution.
On Fridays after work, I took out from my locker the plywood piece that served there as the shelf for headgear.
If you keep a piece of plywood 50×60cm under your armpit it doesn’t look outrageous and is not in the way when getting on a bus or a train car.

Upon arrival in Nezhin, the desk perfectly fitted into an automatic storage cell while the briefcase traveled all the way to Red Partisans and under the table with the tulle tablecloth on which stood the old pier mirror.
The expenses for storage of the plywood piece in a cell amounted to reasonable 30 kopecks – 15 kopecks to set the code inside the door and slam it; 15 kopecks more to open it after collecting the code from the outside.

Once on the way back to Konotop, the cell door jammed.
In such cases, it's opened by an on-duty station attendant with a special key and in presence of a militiaman. 
Before the opening the frivolous cell, the militiaman asked me about the items put inside.
I did not want to strain the man and never mentioned any desk, but he refused to believe in a piece of plywood too. 
When the attendant opened the cell door and I pulled out those 50×60cm and walked away, the militiaman still for a long time looked into the dusty emptiness of the cell.
Quoting one of the sayings of our team foreman, Mykola Khizhnyak, ‘inspected like a magpie a piece of broken bone’...

And sometimes in the briefcase, I also was bringing things to be washed because Eera told to do so. 
And I felt pleased because of that we sort of were becoming a family even though it was in the mother-in-law’s washing machine.

However, the first family celebration was no success. 
You had turned exactly one year old and I invited Eera to go to a restaurant.
She refused because Gaina Mikhailovna was not in favor of going to restaurants.
Actually, at first Eera a little hesitated – to go or not to go?
But I did not manage to persuade her because of my tongue-tied manner of speaking.

Most often the fits of tongue-tiedness attack me in everyday situations. 
I just do not know how to explain obvious things.
‘I say, well, let’s go, eh?’
While the mother-in-law, leaning against the jamb of the door to the bedroom, puts out reasonable arguments that it should take a woman at least two days to get ready for going to a restaurant.
‘Well, what? Come on, let’s go, okay?’
And that instead of saying that it's our daughter's first birthday which would never repeat itself and that sometimes impromptu happen to be better than planned events. 
Tongue-tiedness is a real curse. 

It’s only on some abstract topics that I’m ready with a repartee.
When Brezhnev for the first and final time was passing Konotop by a two-car train, they put his portrait next to the station on a tin shield taller than the building itself.
The giant portrait of dear Leonid Ilyich—Mind, Honor and Conscience of our Time—with all his Gold Star medals of the Hero of the Soviet Union on his jacket.
In case, he would glance from the bypassing car and see how hugely he’s loved around here.

Only they forgot to warn me it was the day of his traveling by and I walked from the Settlement along the tracks until a militia sergeant stopped me and told I could not go to the station.
Okay, said I, I was not going to the station but to the Under-Overpass, and I would take that service path around so that to keep my jeans clear of the fuel oil smeared rails.

The guy in the militia uniform loved and respected Brezhnev no more than I did.
However, taking into account the attendant circumstances—a person without a uniform tries to prove something to a guy in a uniform who, moreover, has an order—he asked me an absolutely well-grounded question:
‘Are you sick?’
And then, with pride, I gave it out:
‘I am incurably diseased with life.’
So promptly – I liked it myself!
The sergeant, with awe and admiration, could not find what else to say but did not let me pass all the same. 

So I celebrated the family holiday alone, although Eera and Gaina Mikhailovna predicted in a duo that nothing good would come of it.
And it was an accurate prophecy.

All I could get in ‘Polissya’ restaurant was a shot of vodka – the last one they had, they told me so.
I was encouraged to buy a bottle of cognac instead, but I'm not a drunk to put away a half liter of cognac alone. 
I confined myself to that single shot and meditations that it was no good to argue with Mothers and that under the conditions of all-pervading matriarchy there certainly had to be a system of communicating vessels between my mother-in-law and the unfriendly waitress.

‘Seagull’ was located farther away from Red Partisans and there I managed to buy a bottle of champagne and a parsley salad for a snack.
And on my way back from the celebration the champagne hit my bladder.

In those days (in the hope to avoid the inevitable) I tried to do everything right.
That was, like sort of insurance – the righteous guy’s wife couldn’t cheat him… or what?
There, of course, were no guarantees but, if you did not think about it too deep, it inspired a timid hope.

Peeing on the sidewalk was wrong, so I went to the toilet in the Bazaar.
The Bazaar gates turned out to be locked for a long time before my coming and I had to climb over.
That also was not entirely correct but not too noticeable in the dark.

By the time when in the corner of the empty and dark Bazaar I approached the iron-sheet toilet door there already stood a block-letter inscription on it ‘On Repair’, drawn with chalk.
As the champagne was on the peak of its fight for freedom I had to pour out my indignation at the dictatorship of the communicating vessels on that same door.
Without affecting the inscription though.

Well, and who else could I meet climbing down the gates if not a militia patrol? 
Welcome to your native planet.
Of course, they did not buy it that someone would go over the closed gate when there was so much sidewalk around in the dark.
I was taken to the sobering-up station.

The doctor there, to check my stage of intoxication, offered to perform several forward bends.
‘Heels together, toes apart?’ said I conversationally.
But that capillary vessel complicated the task and I had to do the bends with my feet put close to each other. 
The doctor asked how much and what stuff had been drunk, received clear information, and with a shrug handed me over to the lieutenant.

The lieutenant asked me about my place of work and, learning I was not local, asked for my mother-in-law’s number and called Gaina Mikhailovna to identify my voice over the phone.
Then they just pointed at the door, refusing to give me a little lift, otherwise, they would lock me up if I did any more nuisance of myself. 

So despite the stubborn opposition of conspiring females and their henchmen, your first birthday became a unique event – the one and only time when I got into a sobering-up station...

The development of my and Eera’s relations was going through gradual and quite predictable stages.

At first, when after a working week I came to Nezhin and excitedly pressed the doorbell button Eera immediately opened the door for me.
I hugged her in the hallway and we kissed.
She even smeared my wrists with glycerin to treat the skin cracked from the frost at the construction site.
‘Well, what a silly fool you are!’ said Eera and I felt happy although the skin hurt.

At the next stage, we stopped kissing. 

Still later, instead of embraces, we exchanged the casual cues: 
‘How d’you?’
‘Fine.’
And that is correct because something needs to be said.

The relations did not stop at that and the door started to be opened by my parents-in-law.
For the most part by my father-in-law.
Sometimes I already had to push the doorbell button twice...

In the winters when my hands' skin condition became of no interest, I stopped frosting it. 
Probably, I became more experienced or else the skin realized it had no chances to be treated with glycerin anymore. 

At our last of the kisses in the hallway, I immediately realized that something was wrong.
Instead of her lips Eera somehow guiltily put up her neck and there was a whiff of the fox smell.
It's not that I had ever sniffed a fox but instantly determined – it's a vixen funk.

Later on that visit, she told me that she was home alone, the doorbell rang and it turned out to be one of her classmates from school.
He knelt before her in the kitchen, embraced and kissed her knees, but she told him to leave and nothing happened.
And I, of course, had another fit of agony, but then I got numb and clenched my wrongly knocking heart and began to live on...

From the hallway, I proceeded to the bathroom, washed my hands and from there to the living room to say ‘good evening' to everybody there and sit down at the table by the windowsill. 
The center of the table was occupied by the TV but there still remained enough place on the oilcloth for the plate, fork, and bread so that I could have supper. 
I did not block the screen and did not bother anyone, if only aesthetically – by demonstrating my chewing profile to the left of the TV. 

Then I took the dishes to the kitchen and washed up.
And those stacked in the sink after all the meals on that day.
I was not ashamed to wash up even when Tonya’s husband, Ivan, was entering the kitchen.
On the contrary, I was proud that Gaina Mikhailovna trusted me with the task, after a couple picky quality checks at the beginning.

First of all, I boiled a kettle of water on the gas stove because it took too long to heat it in the titan for which it was necessary to bring firewood from the basement.
I was washing up in a large bowl put in the sink.
Civilization had not yet come up with detergents and other useful things for washing dishes then, so I used a large piece of gauze soaped with a bar of laundry soap.
And then, of course, I rinsed all under the tap.
Everything by the technology which Gaina Mikhailovna showed me once.
Washing up helped me to pass the time.
I even liked it, especially in that part of the process, when the gas was burning under the kettle with a blue flame.

I was also trusted with dusting carpet taken out to the yard off the floor in the living room.
It was very worn and shabby so one could feel free to beat it thoroughly when dusting.
Sometimes Eera would go out in the yard where I was working it over and she would say that it was enough already because the neighbors in the apartment block were human beings too and deserved compassion.
And Gaina Mikhailovna once said that the method of my dusting showed a translator.
I cannot imagine where she could have seen translators busy with that job...

At times I offered some services on my own accord. 
Once Gaina Mikhailovna was very worried that her son Igor was hospitalized in Kiev because of being ill and she could not go there and find out how he was and I suggested that I would go.

Igor was very surprised and could not believe that I had come to Kiev with no agenda apart from visiting him.
Four hours in a local train to see my brother-in-law with whom I did not know what to talk about.
If I had told of having an interest of my own and that in those four hours I finally read ‘The Journey from St.Petersburg to Moscow' by Radishchev, would it feel better for him? 

Then I had to report to my mother-in-law what her son looked like.
Well, he looked quite normal, except for a certain monkish air, as all the other patients there.
At the hospital, they were given long blue gowns and kept their military headgear. 
That resulted in a wondrous combination of clothing, especially when you watch a couple of patients walking in an alley – the Merlin-like blue robes under the khaki halos with cockades.
Some special order of monks forage-cappians. 

And I was also entrusted with painting the apartment floor.
With glossy red paint.
Not at one go, naturally, because people had to live in the apartment being renovated.
So it took two weekend-visits.
And the kitchen, the hallway and the corridor connecting them Ivan Alexeyevich painted in my absence.

He helped me a lot when I decided to make bookshelves in the form of a bookcase without the doors and walls.
The shelves were, naturally, designed for our future family library.
Ten volumes of the Dictionary of Ukrainian Language were already collected.
I was too late to subscribe to the Dictionary, but many of its subscribers soon stopped to waste their money and the volumes were put on sale at bookstores. 
Besides the incomplete collection of the Dictionary volumes, there were full Kvitka-Osnovyanenko works in four volumes, a dozen of books in English and a motley company angled from different bookstores. 

I could not get the material needed for the project at the SMP-615 and asked my father-in-law to have the planks planed and cut in the carpenter workshop at the Bakery Plant.
I gave him the list of measurements I needed.
When he brought the bundle of readied planks and put it in the hallway of his apartment he tried to convince me it was impossible to make anything worthy out of them.
He even called Eera to the hallway and said:
‘Look, what shelves could be made of these slats?’
And they indeed looked very slim, but before ordering I had thought out thoroughly how to make shelves that would be both light and sturdy.

The project was accomplished at 13 Decemberists because in Nezhin there were neither conditions nor tools for such an undertaking. 
And when I sawed out the bridle joins in the planks, and bonded them with casein glue, polished with sandpaper and covered with varnish then even my father approved the shelves. 

Eera on one of her visits to Konotop was not too much impressed though, at furniture stores you could see more baroque items, these were shelves, yes, and so what?
And Ivan Alexeyevich’s false forecasts could easily be understood – a worker at the Bakery Plant workshop told him the planks were unsuitable for the project and he just repeated the opinion of a professional.

But then my route in Eera’s parent apartment grew even shorter.
One time on my arrival at Red Partisans it took my father-in-law really long to open the door.
Entering the hallway I heard the cries of a squabble.
It happens, a family stank.
I heard angry yells of Ivan, Tonya’s husband, in high-pitched tones, she herself flashed to the kitchen and back, more voices confusedly wrangled in the living room.
Eera peeped into the hallway:
‘The bread is on the table, put the rest yourself.’
And she disappeared again to bicker on with Ivan. 

On account of my arrival, the theater of hostilities moved over to the bedroom of Tonya’s family.
From the living room, it was only heard that Ivan took a circular defense in the corner and his parents-in-law and sister-in-law, individually and then in chorus cried out to him what they particularly were not happy with. 
The words were not to be made out but I could tell that Ivan was answering in short bursts, in a manner of Bandera men guerrillas.

At times some of the attackers retreated to the living room – to recollect what else they had omitted to tell and then again rushed back into the clashes. 
Except for Tonya who did not leave the bedroom, but kept monotonously repeating her clue.
I did not even look there, but everything was clear enough, family squabbles do not shine with the diversity of dispositions.

And all that was boiling against the background of wild screams from the rebellious farmers in Central Asia because the TV was feeding series of ‘The Man is Changing Skin’ and they kept rushing there from one edge of the screen to the other.
Hence the voices.
The rioters took advantage of the watchers being distracted by personal sorting things out in the bedroom.
The dehkans grew so impudent that even jumped out of the TV and continued their rat-racing around the oilcloth on the table.
And I knew that you could expect anything from that TV...

One Sunday, my mother-in-law cooked soup from a bare bone and put the plate for me next to the TV.
And there some mafia clan members were forcing a judge to commit a suicide.
So he put a bullet through his temple and the brains splashed over right into my plate – oops!
And my mother-in-law stood vigilant behind my back to control if I would show the proper respect to her cooking.
What was there to do?
I had to lap it hot...

But no one would escape the just retribution, and now, that the TV and I remained eye to eye, I clicked it onto another channel.
It turned out a violin quartet of chamber music.

But then the father-in-law jogged from the bedroom for recharging. 
And he felt that something was amiss, not as stimulating as expected.
He did not immediately realize that it was because of the cello. 
What could a cello have to do in a Central Asian bedlam?
And when he got it what was what he clicked the channels back.
And the dehkans to him in a joyful joint chorus:
‘Ala-la-ah!’
He inhaled it like a sip of energizer and, with replenished ammunition rushed back to the interminable battle...

Since that, on arrival, after the hallway and the bathroom, I proceeded straight to the kitchen.
There I laid the kitchen table to have some havvage.
And I never looked in the fridge so that later Gaina Mikhailovna would not half-audibly buzz to Eera her reprimands.
While I was eating, you would come running to the kitchen and start to say something in your own, as yet not very understandable language… 
However, I again ran ahead of the events.

To keep Eera, my Eera, to ensure that she would be mine and mine only, I went down the path of righteous life.

(...they do not sell the code of righteousness at the news stalls, but I did not need it.
Anyone knows without checking it by a code when they did the right thing and when not.
Even if your wrong-doing can have tons of excuses and justifications, or even called for by a written law, and even if everybody else around shows their support ‘well done! a good fellow!’ you still know, deep in your heart, that you’d better not have done that and, at that point, you’ll be right because you cannot deceive yourself and you knew all along what was right and what wasn’t.
They finish their empty praise and disperse, but you will have to live on and try to forget what you had done, or maybe to drown it in more and more wrong-doings.

My quest for righteousness was based on a personal interest: if I kept doing everything right then nothing wrong would happen to me, otherwise, it would be too unfair.
That’s what I was building my hopes on.
I never tried to give shape to my all those yearnings and only tried—really hard—to do everything right…)

That's why it took bricklayer Peter Lysoon 2-3 hours less than me to finish the walls of a bathroom-toilet. 
No wooden insertions? Spit a spat and go on laying the walls.
When the carpenters come to install the doors they would think of something to do about fixing the problem.
Is the partition laid with a ‘belly'? 
Who cares?
Say ‘they’ll eat it up!’ and leave it as it is.
The plasterers will come and solve the issue with an additional mortar layer.
But that’s not right.

Therefore, my specialization in the team was gypsum partitions and that of Peter – bathrooms.
However, nothing is a dogma and there always are moments for ‘off we go!’ and forced castling.

But that’s not the whole story.
Besides going the righteous path in the current life, I tried to correct my wrong-doings in the life past.
And that is something you can’t do without repentance.

When I came to the institute hostel, a former freshman Sehrguey from Yablunivka was finishing his fourth ear of study and still lived in Room 72. 
I returned to him the thick English-Russian Dictionary by Mueller.
‘Ho-ho! Where’s it from?’
‘I had stolen it from you.’
After a moment’s confusion, everyone in the room burst into loud laughter, which I involuntarily joined.

(...what’s funny there?
In his story ‘Jane', Maugham explains that there's nothing funnier than the truth. 
Nobody laughed though at the library of the Plant Club when I returned a couple of books stolen there and confessed that one more was missing.
I was really sorry and ready to reimburse.
They forgave me without compensation and did not even cancel my reader’s form…)

Two weeks later my father started to upbraid me for behaving as if I was not all there.
He stuck the forefinger out of his fist and fiercely drilled the air nearby his right temple.

I translated his gesture into the parlance of the Holy Script:
‘Go and take him for he’s out of his mind.’
‘And again some hooey frostbitten! Gone nuts in Nezhin? That’s what you’ve been sent to the institute for?’

Then I lowered the bar and switched over to the Ukrainian folklore:
‘And when the father’s hutta gets burnt down whose attic the sparrows will spend nights in?'
My father did not understand the humor, he did not know that parable and in the next week or two, the matches box from the gas stove in the veranda was missing. 
But then everything settled down and returned to normal.

‘I’m ashamed before people! You enter the tram and get frozen like a statue with your look nailed to the window.’
‘I have to knock step dance along the car, eh?’
‘No!! Just be like everyone else: “hello! how are you? great!” Do not be a renegade!’

And then ‘Time’ news program showed an employee of the Moscow Central Library named after Lenin who confessed that for several years he was stealing valuable publications from the archival department under his gray uniform coat.
I realized that I was not alone to redeem wrong-doings of the past.

But what had brought him on the path to righteousness?
‘The fur-coat-like form of schizophrenia.’
Unexpectedly entering the kitchen I overheard my father told my mother the diagnosis, most likely shared to Eera at the fourth kilometer in Chernigov.

But later on, the sorcerer of Ichnya, after two visits of my sister Natasha there, said he had done his job and I was healthy.
Eera became happy with the news but not I.

Life became boring.
The overwhelming powerful stream of conscience in which I had to choose the fairway like those rafters driving their log rafts down the foam-boiling rapids of the Carpathian rivers turned into placid shoals.
I could still see breakthroughs of the impossible into the world of everyday life—where everyone is like everyone else—but between them and me, there already was that dust-covered grating from the Bulgakov's novel, the dust on grates canceling all pirate brigantines in the unknown seas. 
The heat and full-blooded throb of the belonging vanished.

(...it’s one thing when you are actually riding a log-raft jostling and jumping under your feet and quite another kettle of fish if you can just hit Pause Button and leave all frozen until you’ve poured yourself a cup of tea…)

‘Return me my schizophrenia,’ with genuine bitterness said I to Natasha, but it was too late...

In Nezhin, on the platform near that station building corner where the round clock hung on the bar protruding from the station wall, Eera and I were waiting for the local train to Konotop.
She had the three-quarter yellow jacket on.
And the day was also sunny, a good summer day it was.
Eera smiled at me and said:
‘When I’ll be bad, remember me as I am now when I love you.’
‘Don't talk nonsense. You can't become bad.' 
‘Do not argue, I know.’
‘How can you know?’
‘I know. I am a witch.’
Her eyes turned sad and a slight imperceptible cross-eyedness crawled into them.
It was as slight as my disappointment for I had once thought she was a devil in love like that one in the book which I stole for Novoselitsky.
‘No worry,’ said I, ‘I’m a hexer too.’

Although what hexer could be of me?
Some sleepy warlock at best.

This thought was prompted by the black hardback covers of ‘The Phenomenology of the Spirit’ by Hegel which I bought in Odessa and was reading in the trailer of our team during the midday breaks.
Well, okay, to call it ‘reading' would be too bragging. 
I could not wade through more than one page in a break because I inevitably fell asleep.
I wonder if the translator understood himself what he was turning out or was just rendering it with a ‘perplexed mind’?.

In that Odessa bookstore, they did not want to sell this book to me. 
The two saleswomen were playing for time, exchanging accusatory glances.
At that time the cause of their embarrassment was more than clear for me: they had been expected a real warlock to pick up the book in black bounds, but now I just do not know what to think.
What’s the difference who buys what in the world where each one is like anyone else?
Be happy to complete the sales plan.

I kept Hegel in the locker.
The lockers in our team trailer had no locks but nothing disappeared from there.
Except for the diploma badge and a book by some Moscow literary man.
I read that simply out of a sense of duty, it was from my mother-in-law’s sideboard.

Then I brought ‘The Phenomenology of the Spirit’, in the form of an experiment, to check if it would get lost too.
No go.
I had to read it to the very end.
And then it turned out that it was not Hegel who wrote it at all, but somewhat Rozenkrantz noting down his lectures.
Then he published those notes so that they could translate the thing into Russian so that I would slumber in our team trailer. 
And thank you ever so much.

(...sometimes I ask myself: did the original lecturer really understand what he was talking about, or he just made a living by inventing a tricky way to juggle a ‘thing in itself’, a ‘thin on itself’ and other things in different positions?..)

But one passage I understood completely, where there is a reasoning that a German bricklayer has to eat half a pound of bacon and a pound of bread to fulfill the daily norm, while a French one manages to do it with just a bunch of grapes under his belt.

That summer saw the reconstruction at 13 Decemberists.
By the project of my father, the attached room was connected to the living room and the previous doorway to it from veranda sealed with a wall.
It was planned so that in winter the heat from the stove reached the attached room through the living room making it livable all year round.
The rest of the hutta was renovated too.

After the reconstruction, I moved to the attached-joined room and a friend of Natasha came on a visit from the city of Shostka. 
They used to study together in the Konotop Railway Technical School.
Then the girlfriend got married, divorced but had no regrets because she could sew jeans like ‘Levi’s’.
The fabric of her jeans was not quite the same, but she still earned good money.
She was not too tall, but well-tanned, and had dyed hair plus appetizing figure.
But I, of course, kept my glances in check and did not ask Natasha for how long her friend was going to stay.

Coming back from work, I sat at the desk in my room and read a book in English keeping a dictionary at hand, or else ‘Morning Star’ the newspaper of British communists.
Probably,  they were not exactly communists but nonetheless, their paper was sold at newsstands in the land of victorious socialism for 13 kopecks an issue. 
After the dinner, I worked on translations and had no time for special communication with the guest. 

I do not know where Eera learned about the guest at 13 Decemberists, but she suddenly started questioning about Natasha’s girlfriend and then she said that she herself wanted to move to Konotop and I had to talk with my parents.

I returned to Konotop on outspread wings and at once called my father and mother into the yard.
They sat side by side down on the bench under the tree by the porch and I remained standing on its steps.
Bubbling with hidden joy, I announced Eera’s wish to move to 13 Decemberists.
I was completely unprepared for what happened next. 

My mother crossed her arms over her chest and said that she would not accept Eera because it was impossible for them to get along together in one place.
I heard what she was saying but could not get it – how so?
My mother had always been for me and now she sat on the bench with her arms crossed saying she wouldn’t have Eera about here.
I turned to my father for help.
He shrugged.
‘What can I do? All the hutta documents are issued in her name, she’s the landlady.’

It was already dark in the yard, but in the light of the lamp lit in the veranda I saw how immovably sat my mother keeping inexorable silence.
I was desperately struggling to find what else could be said, at least something, but my mind was blank and void.
Nothing would persuade her.
My father went into the house and I was sitting on a porch step trying to think of something to say but in vain.
The gate latch-handle chinked and Natasha’s friend entered the yard.
She was alone, without Natasha.
‘And why are you like that?’ asked she and sat down next to my mother.

My mother immediately revived and started to explain that the next day the four of them—my parents, Natasha and Lenochka—would go to the RepBase camp for recreation by the Seim.
However, the refrigerator was full and those who remained in hutta could cater for themselves.
The girlfriend approved and turned so that the light from the veranda boldly depicted her large breasts covered with a soft turtleneck. 

Even dumbfounded by the result of the negotiations with my parents, I realized that I was doomed and when left alone with such breasts, without anyone else in the whole hutta, no bridle would keep me in check.
I knew myself and it was clear that my righteousness would not stand a week and even the fact that she was my mother’s nickname would not save me.
And whatever the fridge was full of, yet the innocent lamb prepared for the sacrifice was me.

The next day after work, I did not go, as usual, along the tracks and the Plant surrounding wall to the Decemberists street, but got on the tram to the Settlement and drove to school 13.
From there I moved along the Nezhin street, entering the yards of the huttas with the same question:
‘Where can I rent an apartment?’
At number thirty-something, I was told that in the hutta under the big birch opposite the Nezhin Store, they seemed to be renting. 

The birch was found in the indicated place and it was so old and tall that the red brick hutta under it looked very small.
However, there were two rooms and a kitchen, not counting the dark hallway-veranda.

The landlady, a single pensioner Praskovya Khvost, looked at me suspiciously, but showed a room of three by two meters, with the window looking out on the wide trunk of the birch in a neglected front garden.

 One-third of the room was occupied by an iron bed produced before the WWII. 
The entrance was from the kitchen with curtains instead of a door.
To the right from the same kitchen, behind the same curtains in the doorway, there was the owner’s room.
For me, it was essential to leave 13 Decemberists on that very day and we agreed on 20 rubles a month. 

(...Later, Lyda from our team told me that I could find an apartment the In-Seven-Winds for just 18 rubles but I did not even go to see…)

Coming to the Decemberists street, I borrowed a pull-cart from a neighbor put it at the gate to number 13 and only then entered the yard.

Galya was sitting in the armchair-bed watching TV.
I said polite 'hello' and that I was not hungry and went to my room to collect the books and disassemble the bookshelves. 

The room windows did not have leaves to open so I had to take the thing out going through the living room and the kitchen.
So as not to change the shoes with slippers at each go, I paved the floor with pages from ‘Morning Star’.
The young woman was uncomprehendingly watching my manipulations from her armchair.

I took the books and the bookshelves parts to the pull-cart waiting in the street.
All fitted only I had to drive slowly because the varnished shelves stacked on top were slipping over each other.

In the hutta by the Nezhin Store, my landlady had a visiting old woman and they grew silent and watched the underground functionary shipping stacks of illegal literature to his new safe house. 

Back in Decemberists street I returned the pull-cart to its owner and gathered some of the clothes—the briefcase from Odessa stood at the ready—then I very politely said 'goodbye' to Galya and left her alone with the TV because I know how to win with dignity.

(...actually, it was not her fault that she got into the thick of a family sorting out, later on, she was able to marry a guy from the Settlement, although not for too long, however, that's already her personal story...) 


