~~~ The Solitary Barge Hauler ~~~

My cheeky snubs to the people’s judge straightened out my chest, but not for long.
Everything fell back to the same 'O! Woe to me!' rut – what for? I loved so much! I always did my best!.
Why me?

The unanswerable questions exchanged for the sticky languishing dream that one of these days Eera would come and everything would be fine again…
The fact that Eera through that divorce, logically and inevitably cleared her way for further life without me around, did not at all diminished the longing for the unreachable neither shooed off the hope that everything, somehow, will become fine…

However, uninterrupted suffering is a rather tiresome occupation and I gradually came to the opinion that the divorce should be somehow celebrated.
But what way?
I knew no rituals on this subject and could only improvise.
One thing was clear though, I needed a day, not like the other days. 
And it was for such a day that I went to Kiev.

The Indian summer that year transgressed all the common sense limits and, despite it was the first week of November, I went there in my jacket.
Taking into account the calendar depth of the autumn season, the dark gray waistcoat went along with the jacket.
It did not belong to any three-piece suit but was sewn back in my school years by that same sharp-nosed tailor in her shop next to the bus station. 

That was my rig (plus a shirt and pants) when I emerged from the metro station on the Khreschatyk street and slowly moved along its gorgeous sidewalks with mighty chestnuts.
I went down to the Red Army street cobbled with polished stone and moved further down its slope to ‘The Foreign Book’ store in order to make myself the event-marking present I had chosen during the business trip.
A slight worry nagged me on the way: could it be they had already sold it?
Yet I was almost sure and not much surprised when the bright red jacket of the ‘Chamber’s 20th Century Dictionary’ loomed from the same very shelf.

The salesman, observing my festive outfit—from under the waistcoat there also peeped the open collar of my faded red shirt—asked politely if I would really want that particular book.

(...I was not surprised by his doubt – in that year of the then current 20th century, not everyone could afford a book for 31 rubles 60 kopecks. 
Except, of course, the bricklayers celebrating their divorce…)

I left the store with the thick volume tightly wrapped in their special lavender colored packing paper.
It had to be left in an automatic storage cell at the station.
Yet how to get there? On the subway again?
No, it was another kind of a day.
And I approached the curb with flocks of taxis shooting by.

From the station I also went to ‘The Hunter’ store, at the address given me by Grinya, he wanted some folding fishing rod from there.

After the shopping spree, there began the cultural part of the program. 
The House of Organ Music was filled that evening with the sun shimmering upon the sea in Debussy’s pieces.
Bright sparkling on the happy ripples of waves.
As I was a child, my father told me that listening such kind of music people are to draw mental pictures fitting it.
I could never follow his advice.
The sounds overpower all clever intentions, subdue and leave no space for anything else.

In the post-concert twilight on the sidewalk, it was already really chill and the hunger woke up. 
The taxi took me to the restaurant of ‘The Golden Wheat’ hotel.
First, I tried to rent a room for the night, but the receptionist, assessing my rig incongruent with the season and lack of luggage, cut me off with the usual question below the belt: did I have a reservation?
They knew how to cope with vagrant freelancers.

In the restaurant, to orient myself, I ordered a bottle of wine for a starter and a man with a beret on his head got seated at the table opposite me.

(...when there is a beret, but no briefcase about the man, then you are dealing with an electrician…)

We did not have time to drink even a glass when a young blonde guy landed on the third side of the table. 
He for some reason began to put his fingers in the pose ‘I’ll take your eyes out!’
The electrician grew quiet under his beret.
In my holiday program, there were planned no gladiatorial amusements so I got upon my feet:
‘All right, young man. I leave this feast to you. Enjoy!’

I went to the waiters, paid for the wine and left.
The blonde rushed after me to the lobby, but of the three glazed entrance vestibules, only one was opened to the porch, seeing me through lots of glass doors he, in his haste, could not choose the right one.
I waved my hand for a goodbye and went away.

Sleeping in a waiting hall of the station would hardly add festiveness for the day.
Another taxi driver took me to the hotel ‘Old Prague’.
The young receptionist there also picked up the subject of a reservation, but suddenly turned merciful and gave a room. 
She warned it was more expensive, which was understandable though because, in fact, there were two rooms with a sideboard in the hallway one.

Getting there, I decided it was enough of putting fate to test with my attire and ordered dinner in the room – fish with potatoes and wine, let it be white, please.

Waking up late in the morning, I checked out and went for a walk around the city.
On the sidewalk near the Golden Gate, a blond young man, ran panting past, evidently one from the monad of that boob who got stuck in the glass labyrinth of the vestibules at the Golden Wheat. 
It looked like the whole their monad would have a tough job of getting from the mess they got into with the feast I generously threw to them. 
But the fool ran into it himself.

On the descent to the Bessarabian Market, I decided it was time to dine and turned into the restaurant ‘Leningrad’.
In front of me a group of Negroes entered the same place, however, I was anything but a racist and followed them.
Still, I did not like the over-fat scruff of their file closer. 
A piece of obese Africa.

In the afternoon gloom of the restaurant I could not see where they managed to dissipate but I remained the only guest in the room.
I ordered something ‘in the pot’, so it was written in the menu.
They brought potatoes mixed with meat and brown souse, but all that in a ceramic pot, indeed.

Eating from the pot was very uncomfortable and too much hot as well.
But I guessed to pour part of the steaming stuff into a plate on the table and then was gradually adding to it from the pot.
Before leaving the restaurant, I entered its silent empty toilet and went out a completely different person.
Not the one who had come to ‘Leningrad’.
The lines by Ivan Franko were slowly coiling in the head:

‘One by one get severed the hobbles,
We’ve been tied with to the life of the past...’

And not just that.
The main difference between me entering and me leaving the restaurant was the absence of the jacket which I intentionally left hanging in the toilet. 
It was the wedding jacket in which I was registered as Eera’s husband in the ZAGS of Nezhin.
Besides, it was the same one which survived my unsuccessful attempt at leaving it in the toilet of restaurant ‘Bratislava' in Odessa. 
Perhaps, the time had not been ripe then yet.

Was the act on the celebration program?
No, most likely it was an impromptu inspiration, but I liked it.

Eased and relieved, I lightly walked up the Khreschatyk.
It was being prepared for the 7th of November demonstration.
The troops of the Kiev garrison were training their parade step and a brass band was loudly playing.

Along the sidewalk, they had put endless board stands for spectators, just three steps, but very wide indeed, so that they would watch the demonstration and wave their hands in a show of approbation and joy. 
Before the demonstration, there remained two more days and the steps were still empty. 

I walked along the middle one, clicking my heels against its thick planks, a man in his prime, in a red shirt under a gray waistcoat, and the sun rays vibrated through the branches of chestnuts.
I walked to the metro station and was ready again to the trenches, walls, and partitions.
People really need holidays...

The fact that Panchenko, as if having nothing better to do, hurled cast iron four-section radiator from a window on the fourth floor – without even peeping out, in case someone gets crushed – had a very reasonable rationale.

With that bolt out of the blue, he signaled to all who might be concerned, that the veteran jailbird's balls were still unshaven and under his eight-wedge cap—sported by toughs in the 50's—he still was quite a crazy machine. 

The signal was addressed, first of all, to his superintendent in charge of writing work orders for calculating Panchenko’s monthly payment, and to the chief mechanic in whose division he turned a fresh leaf to start a new honest life.
And it was high time already for a mujik in his mid-fifties.

Of course, it did not concern him at all, that after the second time in Romny I lost the position of the trade-union visitor at the SMP-615. 

That, at first somewhat chaotic position, I had managed to bring to the state of impeccable perfection.
Forgotten were the times when someone from the jacks or carpenters would return to work after a couple days in the railway hospital with disparaging complains about my neglecting to visit them there whereas no bricklayer on our team was ever ignored.
But how could I know?
Their foremen did not report to me! 

The problem was solved radically – at the end of every working day, I called the hospital registry office to ask if they had taken for treatment any employee of the SMP-615. 

Then there arose the question of right usage for the three rubles which the trade union allocated for visiting a hospital patient.
How to spend the sum, so that each sufferer received an equal amount of consolation regardless of their age, gender, and other inclinations? 

Not at once, but that issue also found its own and—without indulging in false modesty—a superbly clear-cut solution.

One ruble was spent on drinks – the invariable three bottles: one of beer, one of lemonade, one of kefir. 
Cakes, marshmallow and/or other sweets were bought for the second ruble.
For spending the final, third one, I went to the railway station and from the wide counter of the news stall where, next to the entrance to the restaurant, were chosen the always popular cartoon magazine ‘Perets', the Konotop city newspaper ‘The Soviet Banner'—which my father affectionately called ‘our liar cur'—and a couple of the central ones for the change. 
And, with a complete and ready visiting package, I went to the hospital

Frictions arose later when I handed in the report for the spent three rubles to be reimbursed by the trade union. 
Slaushevsky rigorously protested mentioning the bottle of beer in the report.
The trade union and beer are two things completely incompatible.
Mutually exclusive.
Then, as a compromise, I suggested him to write the reports himself and I would sign anything.

That’s what a beautifully balanced shebang was left to live only until the November report-election trade union meeting of the SMP-615.
Still and yet, I had managed to feed Panchenko with waffles...

Hearing on the telephone of the registry, that they had a certain Panchenko from the SMP-615, I realized there was no time to lose, I did not want to take risks of a sudden discharge.
First of all, I bought waffles for him.
Then again waffles.
And once more – waffles, for the whole ruble, all in different wrappers and from different shops…

...I praised the interior of the hospital hall with the already dark evening outside the windows.
The plastic bag issued a soft tempting tinkle when I handed it over to him.
He could not refuse, he, as any other worker of the SMP-615, knew that there was beer.

Why was I so uncontrollably laughing wandering from shop to shop in search of waffles of different colors?
It’s hard to explain, but I laughed until tears streamed down my cheeks.

A couple of days later, Lyda, a bricklayer from our team, asked me confidentially in the trailer:
‘Visited Panchenko?’
‘Sure.’
‘With cakes?’
‘No. For him – only waffles.’
She knew that I never lied, for the principle’s sake.
I fell silent, and again I had to restrain inappropriate laughter.

In a moment, Panchenko himself entered the trailer for some reason.
Carefully, weighing each of her words, Lyda asked if I had visited him.
‘Yes.’
‘With the package?’
‘Well, there were some newspapers. I did not even read them.’
No more words were said.

The rest she expressed at home to her husband Mykola.
That he was already a family man and let him listen less to that wafflister Panchenko…

I did not immediately understand why the divorce proceedings left me with a feeling of some incompleteness. 
Something was amiss.

(...the trademark of my stupidity is that in the end, I get it, of which, at first, did not even guess to think about…) 

It turned out, that the people’s judge had completely forgotten to mention alimony!
As if I was childless.
The task of correcting the judicial error lay on my shoulders.

Since December, I started sending monthly 30 rubles to Red Partisans.
For that transaction on the payday, I visited the post office opposite the bus station. 
And, as you were not my only child, I sent the same amount to 13 Decemberists as well.

For several years ‘30 to Nezhin, 30 to Konotop’ had become my financial way of life and the most repeated line in the pocket notebook.
Why just that sum?
I do not know.

In total that was half of my earnings.
For the second half, apart from my hygiene-bath-laundry expenses, I sometimes bought books and every day had a midday havvage in the canteens.

At first, my mother tried to convince me that the Konotop’s ‘30’ I could bring home and pass the sum from hand to hand, although she did not need that money, my argument was it was more convenient for me to do the way I did it.

My status of an alimony-payer was not a secret for our team, with my principle of answering direct questions directly, it was enough for them to ask why each payday I entered the post office by the bus station. 
And some women bricklayers also put that question: why 30 rubles exactly?
Restraining a wave of anger welling up in me from I didn’t know where, I answered no more was necessary and were I paid 3 000 rubles a month the ‘30’ to Nezhin and Konotop would remain just ‘30’.

There were times, when I was not able to send out the alimony and then the line ‘30 to Nezhin, 30 to Konotop’ had to wait until the required sum was scratched up and after sending it a tick popped up next to the line.
At certain periods, I sent only 15 rubles each way.

One of such periods followed a talk between my mother and my sister Natasha, which I accidentally overheard.
They were discussing Eera’s selling my sheepskin coat and keeping all the money to herself.

I had noted the disappearance of the sheepskin coat, but I had no idea where it was gone or why. 

Now, to restore the reputation of Caesar's wife, I had to lower the alimony rate to 15 rubles, until the sum of 90 rubles was collected.
I took the money to Nezhin and in the post office on the Red Partisans street, I asked an occasional visitor to fill out the money order addressing as I dictated.
In the space reserved for a personal note, I wrote in a clumsy handwriting, slanting left: 
‘for the sheepskin coat.’

Why 90 rubles?
The price of a new sheepskin coat with longer skirts at the market amounted to 120 rubles.
Mine was short and still from the Object – the rest is pure arithmetic.

On receiving so large money remittance, my mother wanted to ask me about something, but at that time I was not on speaking terms with my parents, so it was pointless to ask the deaf and dumb fool of me about ‘for the sheepskin coat.’

(...here it is interesting to note, that the wisdom of outsiders cannot make us smarter.
In one of his stories, telling about a young man who stopped communicating with his parents, Maugham remarks that in this harsh and hostile world people will always find a way to make their situation even worse.
I agreed with the wisdom of maxim, but I did not use it.

It took ten years of separation—four of which were spent in a full-scale war—so that when I arrived on a visit to Konotop, I started again to talk with my parents. 
And it was pleasant to pronounce the words ‘Mom’, Dad’…

But only it just seemed to me, that I was not addressing my parents, or that it was not exactly I talking to them.
Probably, the habit had been lost, or maybe because that all of us, by that time, had already changed so much…)

As expected, trade union positions were closed to me, but no one was able to deprive me of the right to fulfill my public duty.
I mean the monthly watches of the volunteer public order squad.

By seven o’clock in the evening, the SMP-615 male employees gathered in a long room of the ‘stronghold of the public order squad’ with its entrance from the end wall of the endless five-story block by the Under-Overpass.
That same where there was the workers’ canteen number three, at the other end.

Mykola Kot, a driver of the truck crane, came one of the first and, without removing his hat of black rabbit fur, sat at a side desk to flip through a pile of newspapers accumulated there since our turn of duty month before.
The men gradually collected into the room and, sitting down on chairs along the walls, began to gossip of nothing in particular.

Kot, still getting acquainted with the press from the days of the past, predicted that were we even to start our yacking from as high as about space orbital stations the conversation would inevitably slip over to the female twat. 
And he, as a rule, was right.

At about ten past seven, there came a militia officer—ranking from lieutenant to captain—contributed to the mujiks’ gossip and then took from a drawer in his desk and handed out red armbands with black inscription ‘public order squad’.
Then we, in threes, left the stronghold to patrol the evening sidewalks in vigil beats – to the station, the Depot Street, the Loony and along the Peace Avenue, but no further than the bridge in the railway embankment. 

The round took about forty-five minutes, then we returned to the base—some of the threes noticeably tipsy—and after a more enliven yackety session set off for the final watch so that by ten o'clock we would go home until the next duty turn in a month. 

A couple of times KGB officers appeared at our evenings with their instructions.
The first time it happened on the occasion of the upcoming Holiday of the October Revolution, and we were instructed to be especially vigilant not to allow provocative pranks.
When the KGBist left, a belated militia officer appeared with the question if we had learned it well that seeing a spy we should immediately grab him by the collar.

The second and last time, another KGB officer shared secret information to facilitate the capture, ASAP, of a former KGB worker who disappeared in an unknown direction. 
She could change her hairstyle and color of her hair, explained the KGB officer showing us her black-and-white portrait, yet she got a special sign for identification – a contraceptive coil of Dutch production inserted in her vagina.
Our mujiks did not immediately understand what that all was about but in a moment poured so suggestive questions that the KGBist thought it best to get out. 
After all, he only executed his orders and was not responsible for the stupidity thereof. 

In one of the vigil rounds, the guys from my ‘trinity' gave me a slip. 
Walking in a group of three wearing red armbands, looks more or less sane, but when looking around you see that among the passers-by along the sidewalk of trampled snow under the windows of Deli 6 you are the only one with a red rag on your arm then, you feel as if you were not all there.

Putting on a brazen mug that I did not care a fig, I went on to the station square.
However, the carpenter Mykola and the driver Ivan could not be made out from among the hasty silhouettes of passers-by.
Some of the younger people looked back at a strange phenomenon – insolent solo public order patroller.

It did not take to be a genius for figuring out that my co-volunteers had pulled off the armbands, bought a bottle of ‘mutter’ in some grocery store and now, in a secluded place, were gurgling in turn from the neck to tone up and get warmer.
Where?
That was the question.

Most likely in the quiet mess of short lanes and dead ends between Deli 6 and the high first platform of the station.
In that jumble of warehouses, venereal dispensary, a couple of private huttas without kitchen gardens and other board buildings.
There I turned not because of desiring a share from their ‘mutter’, but in order to make them ashamed and perplexed at the strength of the deductive method that could detect them in a quiet nook under a lamppost.

But instead of the carpenter with the driver, in the dim cone of light from the lamp, I ran into a genre scene.

A romantic pair—a girl walking with a youth—were intercepted by their mutual acquaintance, a burly young guy, who started sorting it out.
The appearance of the fourth superfluous with a red armband slowed down the action only for a minute.
Realizing that no more vigilantes were to be expected, the tough started to kick the ass of his smaller but luckier in love opponent.
The bantam fell on one knee and throwing aside his jacket of ‘fish-fur’ fabric on the snow, next to his hat already knocked off there, rushed into a retaliatory attack.
I stayed a non-interfering on-looker with a red rag on my arm.

The girl picked up the jacket with the hat and held them, as Eera had once been holding my rabbit fur hat in the main square of Nezhin.

The forces were too unequal, the lightweight lay in the snow, the girl folded his clothes under the lamp and took the winner by the arm and went with him away into the labyrinth of the snow-clad tangled alleys.

The defeated rose and, seeing I was still there, burst out with a confusedly ardent oration to the tune about the strength of the spirit before which the physical strength was nothing because only the spirit had power.
In Konotop every second one is a born lord-speaker.

In order to morally support Demosthenes, I reported that during the fight the girl held exactly his things, and not the fur ‘potty’ hat of his opponent, which also had been knocked off in the snow.
Hearing the words of consolation, he shut up and hastily checked the pockets in his jacket because, with all innate love for oratorical art, the common sense is a more prominent feature when distinguishing a Konotoper...

And also nobody was able to forbid me to see to it that women of our team each year received on 8th of March flowers—callas—one flower for each female bricklayer, because I was not a millionaire and mujiks on our team, not every year guessed to ask how much I had paid and collect a ruble from a man. 
However, the reimbursement of expenses did not bother me much.
I made the discovery that I like to gift presents even more than getting them myself.
But first I had to find the city greenhouse.

It, actually, was as far as the hell itself.
You had to get off tram 2 one stop before reaching the route terminal.
Then take the left turn, and stomp for half a kilometer along the streets from the Civil War. 
Like, the Yudenich Street, or, say, the Denikin Street.
The names though were quite Soviet, but the look and feel unmistakably White-guardian.

When I came to the greenhouse for the first time, the manager took me into a long greenhouse with its gable roof made of squares of muddy glass with rare large drops of water falling down from them.
She wanted me to make sure for myself that there were no flowers.

And those plantings had not yet matured, the callas there not ‘flared up’, they were just white flowers not turned into wide-lapeled muzzles.
And then, without the slightest trail of my tongue-tied speech problems, I gave out to her a sample piece of Konotop oratory.

That was to her, who passed every day among the greenery of the greenhouse beds, the callas seemed not ripe.
Yet for women on our bricklayer team, who day after day saw nothing but crashed bricks, mortar and icy hillocks of dirty snow, those callas, be it even in ‘un-flared-up’ form were the most beautiful flowers.

Since then, while I was working in our team, I never was said ‘no’ to in the city greenhouse on the eve of March 8.
And I proudly drove in a tramcar a cluster of green-and-white callas that would appear in ‘The Flowers’ store by the Peace Square no sooner than in a half month...
