
My decision was final and irrevocable – it’s time to sum it up.
The story I was translating should close the books.
That’s enough of Maugham for me.
Even the fact that the concluding story had to be translated twice could not shake my determination...

I was forced to translate it for the second time because of Tolik Polos path-lifted my briefcase.
It was actually empty, except for the copybook with the last translation, when in the morning I took the briefcase with me to take it after work to Zhomnir in Nezhin.
In the Settlement, there were no passers-by at such early an hour, at least along the railway tracks to the station. 

On reaching the concrete wall surrounding the KaPeVeRrZe Plant, I remembered I needed money for the train, which I had left behind.
I had to go back and that I did, leaving the briefcase to stand alone by the path of the service passage. 

Returning to the Settlement streets, I met only Tolik who walked in the opposite direction.
He also graduated School 13 but two years after me.
After grabbing the forgotten money, I retracted back to the path by the railway tracks.
The briefcase was nowhere to see.
Only Tolik and I had walked that path.
Or had there been someone else?

The answer was received a week later on tram 3. 

Tolik did not say 'hello' to me, he only was making faces from his seat in style of Slavik Aksyanov at the mine of Dophinovka.
But—most importantly—his right hand was plastered.
Was there a need for more direct evidence that it was he who picked up a lonely briefcase in a desolate place?
Not for me.

(… sometimes in my life, I am able not only see but even read the signs…) 

Actually, the work that followed was not a re-translation, it was too fresh in my mind.
One month later I took my last translation to Zhomnir, but already without the briefcase.
So, albeit with a month’s delay, my decision to part with Maugham was executed.
However, it was only a part of a broader plan of actions.

As any other of my plans, it was lacking clear concrete details.

My plans, they are rather no plans at all, but, like, the feelings that it is necessary to do this or that.
Details to the plans come only afterward – in the course of execution. 

The broad plan mentioned before, arose because, finally, I realized that Zhomnir would do ‘match-making’ for none of my translations.
Never, nowhere.
It did not matter why, the main thing was, that it’s for sure.

So what now?
Very simple, the issue of publication should be solved in a make-it-yourself way. 
To go that way, I had to take away from Zhomnir all my translations in thin school copybooks with covers of different colors, piled somewhere among papers stacks on the shelves in his archive chamber.

I arrived in Nezhin and announced to him about my intention to take back my still-not-alpha versions of Maugham in Ukrainian.
Zhomnir did not object and did not ask any questions.
He arranged a feast because during these years I became sort of a distant relative in his house. 
A poor, uninfluential one, but, at times, handy, say when pasting the living room of his apartment with new wallpaper... 

We sat at the square table, pushed from the wall to the center of the living room, and ate everything being brought by Maria Antonovna from the kitchen.
We drank strong village moonshine.
Zhomnir was enthusiastically discussing the gold pectoral of great artistic value, recently excavated from an ancient mound in the steppe.

Changing the subject, he asked what my current relations with Nezhin were, meaning Eera.
I proudly replied those relations proved to be fruitful, meaning you. 
Then I cautiously asked how Eera was.
‘How what?' answered Zhomnir. ‘Whoring around the city.' 

It rammed me in the solar plexus, although not as hard as the words of Eera that she had a certain Sasha, as she cared to inform my sister Natasha, who withheld the retelling until my divorce with Eera, to use it as a booby prize, I suppose.

Most of all I was struck by the complete coincidence of Zhomnir’s answer with the words of the mujik at the Konotop brick factory replying to my question about Olga.

(...for all the difference in educational and cultural level, when we need to knock our neighbor’s brains out, we use the same old good stone ax…)

When it was time to set off for my local train, Zhomnir put all the copybooks with my translations in a plastic bag, that become tight and heavy, and went out to escort me to the station.
That moonshine was really a strong stuff, but I remember how the electric train rolled up and with a hiss threw apart the door opening to the platform.
Refusing Zhomnir’s help, I went towards the round tunnel of the car vestibule with gleams of nickel-plated handrails on its sides.
Catching the left one, I climbed inside, went over to the opposite closed door and hung the bag on the top of the handrail there.
The last thing I heard was the sound of a door slamming together behind me...

When I slowly came to my senses, I still stood there, clutching in my left hand the top of the handrail by the closed door.
The train also stood motionless at the fourth platform of the Konotop railway station.
It was empty, because according to the schedule before its departure further to Khutor Mikhailovsky there was still an hour or two.

With my abdominal muscles turned stone hard and stopped breathing, I saw that the handrail was empty. 
On the other three handrails in the car vestibule, there was no plastic bag in sight. 
Slamming the sliding door, I went into the empty car and glanced along the empty rack rails above the windows.
I returned to the vestibule and exhaled: hooooey!

I did not feel like sitting in the leatherette-covered seats of the empty local train, and I went through the underground passage and over the station square to the Loony park, on a hard wooden bench. 
There I sat for a long time without any thoughts, only sometimes imagined myself in the form of a stupidly frozen statue above the handrail from which they were removing the plastic bag.
Who?!
What's the difference? 
Whoever it was the harvest did not bring them much of joy – some absolute uselessness.
If only to kindle the firewood in the stove, would do for a few winters…

After thoughtlessly sitting for about an hour, I remembered that it was the SMP-615 day of duty turn in the public order squad.
I dragged myself to the stronghold room to sit on further – indifferent, detached and silent.
Only with the arrival of the militia officer, I knew what to do next. 
‘Comrade Captain, lend me tree rubles till our next turn on duty.’
‘I do not lend in rubles. Only in days of arrest. Fifteen enough?’

His wit only confirmed the correctness of my plan.

The next day, three rubles were borrowed from our team and after work, I went to Nezhin. 
There, in the five-story block of the institute teachers in the Count’s Park, I found the apartment of ever smiling Nona.
I said that after several years of work, I lost all of my translations from Maugham.
Now, for their restoration, I needed the originals of the stories, all of which were collected in the four-volume edition by the Penguin Publishing House that was in her possession. 
Could she, please?. 
With her usual sweet smile, Nona brought the books, placed them into a plastic bag and handed over to me.
With what a joy my heart was pounding – thank you!

‘How do you like it, Maria Antonovna. This scoundrel of Ogoltsoff lost all of his translations in the local train!’
‘Because you shouldn't have made the poor boy drink so much!’

Maria Antonovna also did not know that all my misfortunes or joys, ups, and downs, all my pleasures, and deprivations sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who is now composing this letter to you lying in a one-person tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lap of the river named Varanda… 

‘The habit is given to us from above,
As a fit substitution for happiness...’

This immortal line of the great classic hints openly that for the third time in Romny they raked me up purely out of the developed habit.
And that time almost everyone in the SMP-615 knew that any other day they would pinch me...

Two years later, at an accidental meeting on the narrow trail along the railway embankment, behind the sports grounds on the outskirts of the engineering college, that knowledge was disclosed also to me by the retired major Petukhov, the then head of the personnel department of the SMP-615. 
Without any pressure or leading questions from my part, Petukhov told me how the superintendent Ivan almost every day came from the construction site to his office to call psychiatrist Tarasenko about my next deviations.

‘He sang this morning. Maybe it’s time?’
‘Let him sing.’
…
‘He wrote an explanatory note in verse.’
‘What note?’
‘He lost his helmet and I demanded an explanatory note of him. Will you come after him?’
‘Not yet.’
…
‘He shoved his shirt into a bridging slab hole and buried it with mortar.’
‘That’s it! Take care he doesn’t get away.’...

Singing at the working I allowed myself not every day, but rather often.
Sometimes, especially when a construction site in the At-Seven-Winds drowned in a dense cold fog, someone from our team would ask:
‘Sing it, Sehryoga!’

‘I had a wife,
She loved me so much,
And just one time she cheated,
And then she made her mind:
“Eh! One time, yes, and once again,
And many, many, many, many more times, yes...’

However, our team liked the Ballad of the Gypsum more:

‘Now I’m lying on my back, all plastered over,
Every member of mine is pre-packaged!..’

As for the helmet, it was not lost, it's just that I had shown off my gentlemanlity. 

I was walking among the construction sites of the At-Seven-Winds and by the nine-story block, there were female plasterers from the PMK-7. 
They picked some flowers in the fresh grass, most likely dandelions because yellow they were. 
They asked me for a plastic bag and I, with a wide hussar gesture, threw them my helmet to use as a basket for collected flowers.
I even pointed out to them the brown trailer of our team where to return my helmet. 
Since then I had seen neither them nor my helmet... 

Of all our team it was only I who put on a helmet that’s why the superintendent Ivan made a fuss with his explanatory note.
But calling the note I wrote on his demand verses was just a flattery, it was nothing more than vers libre…

Well, about the shirt, yes.
With that shirt, I ran into it flatly. 
That time I imprudently indulged in my bias to self-invented rituals.

The first day of summer had come.
Well, was it possible not to observe the event?

In summer, even if you wear nothing but a tank top under your spetzovka, you still swim in your sweat.
A shirt in summer is a superfluous element.

That green shirt of some kind of finely creased synthetics I had been wearing for six years.
And that bitch of a shirt did not want to wear off, and I had to sweat in it like in any other synthetic fabric, in spite of its being finely creased.
And so, on June 1, when I got out of the trailer, the green shirt with its sleeves tied together, was a wrap on top of my black spetzovka put on my stark naked torso.
I went up to the working place and buried the shirt in one of many holes in the floor slabs between the unfinished walls.
There were no garbage bins at the site and just to throw the shirt into the ochco of the outhouse did not seem right – we had shared sweat for so many years. 

Then I went to the third floor of the next section and laid the traverse wall with ventilation ducts alone until Peter Lysoon appeared to call me to the trailer.
Along the way, he somehow kept his eyes off me and spoke on esoteric botanical topics.

All those strange symptoms flew out of my head when in front of our trailer I saw a van-UAZ with a burly militiaman next to it in his forage cap with red band and psychiatrist Tarasenko.
Our team with overseer Karenin and superintendent Ivan formed an uneven semicircle about the visitors. 

Tarasenko announced to the audience that my behavior had always been abnormal and today I stepped over the line with burying my shirt into the hole in a concrete slab.
Then he democratically asked the crowd if they had noted additional anomalies about me.
The people responded with silence.
One of our women endeavored to hint that the shirt was completely worn out, and Tarasenko, so that avoid meandering discussion of the topic, ordered me to go into the trailer and change my clothes.

I obeyed unquestioningly and then I climbed into the van with some drunkard in its hold and we were taken away. 
During the stop near the Medical Center, the drunk tried to convince me to jerk the claws in different directions – the militiaman would not be able to chase both at once. 
I kept quiet, realizing that it was better forty-five days under syringes than the rest of my life on the run.

Then a young plain-clothes guard joined us together with one more drunk and, along the trodden road, we drove to Romny.
On the way, we made a stop in some roadside village to load into the hold a couple of old woman in black and a troubled man who swore to all the present, in turn, that he did not remember anything of what was yesterday…

Upon arrival at the psychiatric hospital, we were taken in different directions and for some reason, I was X-rayed in a supine position. 
Probably, they were just testing a newly installed equipment.
I did not see any of the drunkards anymore, in the madhouse such cases were taken care of by unit three, and unit five was waiting for me...

The regular brainwashing through my ass again passed in the Area and overcrowded wardroom for the night repose.
In all the categories higher than that of the departed, of the acquaintances, I saw only Sasha, who knew my brother Sasha, but he slept without ever waking up. 

As a veteran and for the sake of philanthropy, I turned to the head doctor with a plea to exchange my iminazine injections with iminazine pills.
She promised to think it over and ten days before the end of the term she canceled one of the three my daily injections.
And for that, I now recollected her name – Nina. 

Nothing more remarkable happened, except that I learned the way to provide first aid in case of seizure of epilepsy.
It is necessary to grab the epileptic by the legs and drag away from the Area into the shade under the canopy.
There he would go on with beating his back against the ground, but gradually reducing the tempo until he comes to himself.
Some halfwits consider it useful to drive flies with their dirty hands from his face, but that does not affect the course of the seizure...

On that trail under the railway embankment, Petukhov did not tell me just one thing – why I was so closely followed and taken under so unremitting control. 
But there was no need for it because of I knew it as well as he did.

My arrest took roots in the reconstruction of the maternity hospital, a long two-story building by the crossroads of the Lenin street and the descent from the Department Store.
Each construction enterprise of Konotop was doing their part in the works.
The SMP-615 was responsible for several partitions and bathrooms in the right wing of the first floor.
Four plasterers and I were sent to execute the task.
We managed in one week.

When the women were already plastering the partitions I had laid, in the corridor appeared a man in a clean suit and with a necktie.
Beholding the four yummy females, the visitor began to spread out his peacock tail against the backdrop of the wretch of a jack for which he counted me.
I politely asked him to keep his ardor in check and not cough in all directions.
‘Hey, you! Know who against you’re ramming? I am the First Secretary of the City Party Committee.’
‘And I am a bricklayer of the fourth category.’
‘Okay! You’ll know me!’

He left and half an hour later our chief engineer flew into the corridor, out of his breath,  because he was the SMP-615 party committee chairman too.
‘How d’you dare to use foul language at the first secretary of the city party committee?’
The plasterers unanimously testified that there was not a single taboo word on my part.
The information did not console the chief engineer, but he left.
That’s all.
Nothing could be simpler – a male with levers of power in his command versus a male in a mortar splattered spetzovka.

The only thing that really hurt me was the accusation of using the derivatives from ‘fuck’.
In all the years in the SMP-615, I righteously refrained from using such words even deep in my mind... 

At the beginning of autumn, when soaping myself in the bathhouse I suddenly discovered my stomach became bulging like the rigid forewings of a May beetle and almost same way unwilling to retract.
Soon my mother noticed that I was turning double-chinned. 
After one of the evening dinners at 13 Decemberists, she put her hand on my shoulder with a victorious announcement:
‘You're getting fat, brother Rabbit! Relax, so it should be, you're from our breed.' 
I did not answer to the smile on her round face under which—I knew that without looking—the, even more, round figure was expanding, and I kept silent too. 
I did not want to be such a breed and become round. 
I would not succumb to their iminazine!
Some radical measures were the must.

Start with those same dinners at 13 Decemberists, my mother was skillful at piling no less than two servings of rice or potatoes on a plate.
At the same time, everything was so delicious, that you imperceptibly ate all of it. 

The first step became the repeal of bread.
Okay, I eat as much as you care to load, but I’m not obliged to eat bread and I will not.
And I stopped eating it even in the canteens.

As for the ‘will not’ that was a sham because I always liked bread, especially rye bread, moreover when it’s warm.
I was able to finish off a loaf of such bread at one sitting, without any stuffing apart from the words I learned from my father: 
‘Soft bread and mouth wide make heart rejoice at every bite.' 

A month later, seeing that the breadless diet was of no help, I just stopped going to the canteens at the midday break.
That equalized the impaired balance.
A breakfast in the canteen plus two servings at the dinner in the evening made for obtaining three meals.

And what about the midday havvage?
I devoured, in the words of our team, ‘Vsesvit’, which I each month brought to the trailer for reading.
As a result, by the New Year, in the same city bathhouse behind the square of Konotop Divisions, I proudly observed my sunken, like on a healthy wolf, stomach.
I always liked it to be that form.
Some concave-bellied Narcissus.

(...there are lots of words you seemingly know – heard, read, and even pronounced more than once.
Sure, I know the word!.. until asked about its meaning.
But such inquisitive bastards are rarely met and you continue to interpret seemingly known words the way you vaguely feel they should mean, sort of...

The word ‘asceticism’ is one of the brightest examples of how people do not understand themselves what they are saying.
90% of the population, to whom the word, like, is clear, would imagine a man worn-out by self-torture in unkempt, tattered beard around burning eyes. 
This is just as wrong as the word ‘athlete’ to designate exclusively sumo fighters.
In fact, the root meaning of ‘asceticism’ is conveyed by the word ‘training’.
If you are eager to win a beer tournament and keep drinking three liters of beer daily to train yourself and be in the form, you are an ascetic.
As well, as the neighbor’s girl that every day rushes violin scales behind your apartment wall.

Damn her asceticism with all that f-f.. flats and sharps!

That is, an ascetical ascetic, preparing themselves for future life in heaven, is just a special case among the other ascetics.

Asceticisms are short and long, depending on the purpose…) 

And what—if I may ask—were the goals that made me so rigorously guard my being thin as a rake and every weekday write out unfamiliar words from the newspaper ‘Morning Star'? 
As I already tried to explain, there is a certain vagueness about the details of general plans. 
I just feel that it’s necessary and therefore I do so.

The extracts from the ‘Morning Star’ required keen attention and self-checking.
When meeting an incomprehensible word about which I absolutely knew that it had been already come across in the newspaper, it was tempting to omit it, after all, it remained exactly the same! 
But what does it mean?

It's too tedious to rummage through the pile of written copybooks, much easier to look it up again in Chamber's Dictionary and once again write out what it meant. 
Therefore at times, I was looking up a word whose page number I could say by heart, but not its meaning. 
Some memory, eh?
That’s what asceticism does to a person.
You repeat actions without really knowing why you have to...

For me, the incident of that evening did not become a temptation, I only was amazed.
And she, for her part, was not seducing me but rather tried to claim fulfillment of parental duty.

I was grossly indebted to Lenochka.
I never took her in my arms, nor kept her in my lap, nor stroke her hair.
We just lived in the same hutta, where she had once been told that I was her dad but, in fact, what kind of father was I?
Just some dry formula, an abstract symbol.
A contactless dad.

Of course, I never pushed her away, at times I could even get carried away by talking to her, but for a child that, probably, is not enough.
And for me, as a father, that surely is not enough but so turned out my relationship with each and every one of my five children... 

When Lenochka was born, I just was not ripe yet for the role of father.
Dad at eighteen? Don’t make me laugh!
Then followed the years at the construction battalion and the institute.

When you were born, I was already fit to be a father, and I loved you selflessly, but not for too long – my reputation separated us. 

I met Ruzanna in her six years.
She called me ‘daddy’ all along and I loved her as my daughter, but I hugged her for the first time at her departing to Greece to her husband Apostolos.
Again the same contactlessness.

I could not embrace and caress Ashot and Emma, born after him because Ruzanna was around and she had not got anything of the kind from me. 
That would be unjust.
So, the father of five children, I still remained just a formal dad.
Poor kids!
Yet it's unfair to be sorry for them only because I also lived a life deprived of kids' affection...

Now let’s return to how Lenochka tried to correct such a glaringly wrong state.

She entered the room and sat on my lap, separating me from the desk with the dictionary, a copybook and ‘Morning Star'.
Looking up at me, she raised her hand and pressed the small palm to my cheek.

Probably, she tried to teach me how to do it.

(...what pushed me away?
Fear of falling to incest?
Not a chance, with my robotic self-control.
Most likely, the smile on her face saying ‘Oh, you poor thing!’ had put my back up..)

‘Well, enough, Lenochka, I have to work.’

The smile gave way to an angry expression and she started to vengefully jump, sitting on my lap.

‘What? Dreams of sweetmeats? Ain’t it too early?’

And I rose to my feet like a soulless robot, leaving her without the pad for bouncing...
