
Several days later, on return from work, I noticed a change on the bookshelves. 
There appeared a black hole.
The high cheekbone of Eera’s face, on the amateur photo in the middle of the stream, was punched through.

The tool of that vandalism, and maybe even Voodooism, served a sharp pencil, or, possibly, a ballpoint pen.
I did not dwell on the question: who?
What’s the difference?

‘Lenochka, come here!’
‘What?’
‘As a father, I have to take care of your education, so that you understand what is what.
Now, look at the photo on the shelf.' 
‘What?’
‘This is called baseness.’
‘It’s not me.’
‘I am not saying it’s you. Just remember what ‘baseness’ is. And it does not matter who does it.’

The photo had to be taken to the photo studio opposite the Loony.
Their employee Arthur, a young Armenian specializing in the transfer of photo portraits to ceramics, said the hole was fixable. 
Only I asked to enlarge the picture to the size of a wall portrait, leaving everything as it was, and the stream too.

For the restored and enlarged photo, I also bought a cardboard frame and put it back on the shelf.
Seeing the result, my mother gave a derisive jeer and that was the only comment.
I did not start any pedagogical conversations on the topic, and the photo remained completely immune to malicious attempts and stood there slowly collecting dust... 

On the eve of the second anniversary of her son Andrew, my sister Natasha complained of impossibility to find a railway model even for the ready money.
Did I remember the huge circle of tiny rails with a miniature train running along at the Object?
I had vague childhood memories of the beautiful toy and picked her complaint as an excuse to break out of everyday Konotop life. 
I was a loving uncle, after all!

For a start, I went to Kiev...

The saleswoman of the specialized department store ‘Kids' World' sat glumly behind the counter in a black padded jacket of workmen over her blue coat of the specialized store uniform. 
She got a bit more cheerful when I told her I was looking for a choo-choo.
She chuckled and answered in a villagers parlance so that the yokel of me would understand:
‘Ain’t a-having any choo-choos.’
It did not surprise me because what Natasha said would always be so.

The next detail coming to the plan became the capital of our Homeland – Moscow.
It was where were stretching the caravan trails to for those exasperated with empty store shelves in the deficit semi-deserts.

In the metropolitan ‘Kids' World,' there were choo-choos with cars, and rails and bridges so that the train could run over, powered by a small battery. 
I took the prey to the railway station, stored it in an automatic storage cell and returned to the downtown to snatch my share of the cultural life.

At the ticket office of the Bolshoi Theater, I was told that the tickets should be reserved two weeks beforehand. 
A little disappointed, I left the glorious hotbed of culture discriminating against flotsam loving uncles.

On the sidewalk outside, there was a glass cubic booth entirely curtained from inside with all sorts of show bills selling tickets to the theaters and concert halls of the Moscow city. 
For the coming evening, they offered to choose either the concert of leading pop stars in the Kremlin Hall or a concert of a jazz band at the Central Theater of the Soviet Army. 
So I could visit the Kremlin for the stale garbage they poured on TV, or…
‘Jazz, of course!’

(...they say that the railway station of Chernigov was built under the Germans, during the occupation.
And I trust those sayers.
Why?
Well, at least for the fact, that they are not paid for that, unlike many compilers of countless Soviet history books.

And they say also, the bird-eye view of the Chernigov station presents a Teutonic cross.
I had never considered the building in question from above, yet I can testify that from all the stations visited by me, only there any time of the day you could have ready boiling water from a big copper tap…) 

And all that reminds me, that the building of the Central Theater of the Soviet Army looked like a five-pointed star.
From above.
So hearsay had it...

Inside it was a massive interior with a large hall on the first floor and exhibition stands in the wide galleries on the second.

I scrupulously examined the exhibition of envelopes and matchbox stickers issued during the Great Patriotic War, because I arrived there two hours before the concert.
And what else could I do in the unfamiliar winter Moscow?
The pictures on the envelopes and stickers, with all their naive primitiveness, turned out to be nostalgically appealing because I grew up on black and white movies of that period. 

Then I went down to the hall, where the jazzmen soon began to install and check their instruments on stage – the drummer kit, the vibraphone, the speakers.
Having finished these preparations, the musicians attacked the bold Jewish man for coming so too late.
He drove a fool to them about hardships of Moscow life and then went on a counterattack to the tune that he soon would give up all that music altogether and let anyone give him a good reason why he needed it at all.

They left the stage and the hall began to slowly fill up.
For the audience of about two hundred the soft chairs in the hall were more than enough.
And the concert started.

The announcer was a tall fat girl who also sang at times.
I absorbed one number after another and wanted only one thing – let don’t them end.
What Dixieland the vibraphone sounded! 
And what a bass guitar!
Once the guitarist was left alone with the girl and his bass guitar and they, just three of them, performed such a blues on the empty stage!. 
The Jew came out only once, he played a tom-tom.
Played?!
The whole Africa would not be able to give out such a number on drums.
I forgave him his bald head and dumb talk before the concert because he turned into a completely different person. 
He forgot that he did not need it and created rhythms filled with thrill. 
‘Bravo!’...

Apparently, in the Central Theater of the Soviet Army, aka TTSA, parallel to the concert had been held another event because to the barrier in the locker room there also crowed officers in uniform who were not in the hall.
The cloakroom attendant girl brought two clothes at once and put them on the counter.
A generals’ overcoat with a red silk lining and the karakul collar (so this withered mushroom on my right is a general?) and the camel demi-season from Alyosha Ocheret.
She laid them down and gave a sigh to them. 

(...and what are we to do?
The usual dilemma of life – either a hussar in his prime, but without a kopeck in his pocket, or a tattered ruin of a general with a secured income.
Everyone has levers to please the ladies in sighing mood, that's only those levers are located in different spheres…) 

Moscow taxi drivers were more professional than their Kiev counterparts.
Anyway, the one who picked me up after the concert, having estimated my look and lack of hand luggage, guessed to take me to a hotel where they did not start the fiddle-fart talk of reservations. 

The hotel ‘Polar’ was starting from the sidewalk and getting lost somewhere up there in the darkness.
The receptionist sent me by elevator to unimaginable heights between the twelfth and sixteenth floors. 
The room was similar to the doss room at Ukrainian stations where you could spend the night having the passport and one ruble for a bed.
It's just that in the ‘Polar' room the beds were more, about twenty pieces, and the guests in their sportswear were already laying on them. 

At that moment, my stomach reminded me that I had forgotten to dine after the cultural life, as well as during my hunt for the train model.
I asked where a dining room or buffet was and the relaxing sportsmen, with some kind of gloating, explained that anything of the sort was closed at seven.

I felt more and more hungry, and there was also an urge to punish my neighbors happy to break the unwelcome news, so I take off my camel coat and drove back down by the elevator.
On the low wide porch outside, next to the hotel entrance, there also was a tall door to the restaurant.
It was, naturally, locked but inside you could see lights and some kind of motion.

I started to pound onto the brown frame of the door glasses.
A man in a cap and yellow strips on his jacket appeared on the other side.
At the sight of me in a jacket open on the white shirt, against the black ink background of the late evening and the tiny sparkles of downing flakes, he had no other options but to deduct my being a guest who had got out from the restaurant to powder my nose or something in the open air.
He unlocked the door and I rushed into the hall.

The restaurant occupied a considerable area, it was housing the festivities of two weddings at once and there still were vacant tables.
I had to wait a long time, but at last a waiter approached me to whom I explained my wish to have a plain meal without excesses.

To pass the time until he brings my Spartan order, I watched the dance of the newlywed from the wedding closer to me.
At the end of their dance, the burly bride got bugged and dealt a mean elbow punch into the chest of the skinny groom. 
Clutching his tie, he cringed his face in a pain-hiding smile, where a few teeth were missing. 
The foundation of marital relations was being laid as early as the wedding party.
Oh, boy! You’ve really stepped into...
Sorry, that was a wrong card…
Aha! Here it is!
"May the love and happiness you feel today shine through the years."

Paying for the meal I was one ruble short.
Actually, I had a ruble, but I wanted to keep it for the next day's expenses. 
I asked the waiter's name to make up the shortfall later.
He gave his name and did not insist on getting the ruble immediately.
I got back to the room up there contentedly well-fed and to the questions of the curious guests casually informed that the restaurant below was still working...

In the evening of next day, I arrived in Konotop and proudly brought the gift for my nephew to the At-Seven-Winds.
Natasha’s family already lived there in the nine-story block constructed by the PMK-7.
The trip by the elevator to the fourth floor seemed provincially short, but their door was not opened to me.

Guena sometimes left for sessions at his correspondence technical school in the Donbass, and Natasha might have been visiting some of her block neighbors. 
I did not know a single one of them, although, in the form of helping the young family, I wrote all the test works on philosophy and history for Guena. 
From the black sheep of a lousy brother-in-law, you still can sometimes get a fluff of wool. 

On my way to 13 Decemberists, I turned in one of the dead-ends of the Pirogov street, where Guena's parents' hutta was located. 
His father was asleep already and Natalya Savelyevna sat in the living room with Andrey – her grandson, aka my nephew.
I wanted to leave the box and go, but she asked me to assemble the toy railway, Andrey was still awake anyway.

When the train model, with low buzzing, started to run around the floor in the living room, I was not an uncle anymore, Andrey and I became equal in age...

The restoration of the translations lost in the fit of drunken akinesia on a local train took about a year.
Because they still were fresh in memory I was not able to stretch the pleasure longer.
With the final period in the last of the translations, I took the four-volume edition of stories by Maugham to Nezhin, to return them to Nona.

Nearing the teachers’ block in the Count’s Park, I caught up with Nona and Lidya Panova, who was my group’s curator in the years of my study at the English Department of the NGPI.
They were heading to the entrance to the staircase in their section, but, noticing me, stopped.
I greeted both of them and informed Nona how impossible it was to convey with mere words all the gratitude I felt for the four-volume originals borrowed from her and now brought back, here you are.
She smiled from under her glasses and reached out for the plastic bag.

I intercepted her hand, like, for a democratic handshake in style of characters by Jack London.
But then, unexpectedly even for myself, I bent and kisses the back of her hand.
Only after that, the bag was passed. 
Straightening up, I gave Panova a stiff nod and left.
Well, at least I hadn’t clicked the shoe heels like hussar Lieutenant Rzhevsky, the hero of f-f.. folklore.

My euphoria got off the local train at the first stop and anxious thoughts became my fellow travelers...

What a blessing, after all, is the inability to make up detailed plans! 
Them those plans should be kept as short as possible.
Prepare a collection of translated short stories to be printed in 150 000 copies.
Period.
When thinking the plan over in minor details, you expose it to a deadly risk.
There inevitably will pop up some insurmountable details to send your plan to rest like the Titanic was by its iceberg.
Look out! What the f……!!!!!
And peaceful becalmed bubbling.
And why to bother to start doing the impossible…

Which normal publishing house will ever undertake considering the scribbles of my handwriting? 
Is there a way to transform them into typewritten text?
Learning to type myself?
A yummy plan!
Know a place where they sell typewriters?
And another iceberg penetrates the hold…

The secretary of Manager of the SMP-615 had a juggernaut of ‘Yatran’ typewriter on her desk.
Sort of a shop floor machine with a black cord to feed it with 220  voltage. 
You simply touched a key and it responded with series of uncontrollable bursts, like a Kalashnikov assault rifle, nothing like the seductive cluck-cluck-cluck of typewriters in the movies.
Besides, the secretary did not know Ukrainian and even Russian texts typed with one finger.

Well, suppose, after work, I would come to the office and little by little…
Yes, this one too went straight to the sea bottom because of the SMP-615 new boss’s beings so jealous.
He viewed the SMP-615 administrative building as his personal chicken coop, and would not tolerate any bricklayer horsing around even after work.
The icebergs of unforeseen details threatened the plan from all directions and brought the navigation to a halt...

We worked in the locomotive depot at the construction site of the three-story administrative building, when Natasha, seeing me on a tram shared, by the by, that Eera was going to get married in Nezhin.
To doubt the words of my sister was useless, they just always had to be taken for granted.
The news in passing somehow crushed me for more than a day.
Yet, I recovered, thanks to our foreman Mykola Khizhnyak’s suggestion that I dismantle the trestles along the finished partition on the second floor...

When the laid partition height reaches 1.2 meters, you have to install the cradles by it, bridge them with planks and from that trestle continue laying brick up to the ceiling.
The cradles brought from the SMP-615 base were too few for all the bricklayers and we were substituting ‘ratsukha’ for them (that is how our team streamlined the word ‘rationalization).

‘Ratsukha’ was a pair of pallets stitched with nails together to work instead of cradles.
Because the pallets were shorter than needed, on top of the first deck we added further ratsukhas to be bridged in their turn.
The whole contraption looked like a house of cards, was more flimsy and shaky than legitimate trestles, but it worked.
The trickiest moment came with dismantling ‘ratsukha’ trestle.
Some of the decking boards were nailed to the pallets, other not, and they all were high above your head and, when you started to knock them off and down to the floor, the scattered fragments of brick and layers of dried mortar stuck to the boards up there were pouring down as well.
Few people on our team liked dismantling trestles.
And for me, it was, sort of, a chess etude. 
Only the falling fragments should be dodged in time.

Yet for that particular dismantling, I sent all chess to hell. 
Furious, like a berserk Viking running to battle in just a cloth shirt, with a long iron breaker I pulled the boards from the nails screeching and squealing in protest.
I threw off the top deck and, swinging and raging over the mess of boards under my feet, kept slashing the cradles of the stitched pallets with sweeping blows of the same breaker while roaring like a wounded beast:
‘A wedding?! Here’s a wedding for you!’
My nostrils rounded and sprawled in the frenzied rage and pumped the dry dust, whipped up with crushingly collapsing trestles, in and out. 

It’s good, at least sometimes, to let yourself go.
Not everyone though is vouchsafed the pleasure.

Me neither, for even while raging and carried away with the pleasure of having all the restricting tethers cut I still was fully aware that I was only aping the actions of Odysseus from a recent movie adaptation of his wanderings.
He similarly pulled his lips over the clenched teeth when coming back home he started to knock off, one by one, the suitors of his wife Penelope.
And about the wedding which ‘here’s for you!’ that also was a quotation from the same film.

Anyway, just in a few minutes in place of the trestle, there was a heap of boards interspersed with torn pallets. 
The room was filled with a thick cloud of dust and, in the corridor, the foreman’s wife, rigger Katerina, hiding by the doorway, listened intently – what wedding was I about?.

My sister Natasha never reported about Eera’s new marriage.
It seems that time Odysseus and I did what we wanted.
Yet, in afterthought, what right did we have to impede the natural and normal current of events in the life of an unfamiliar woman whose only guilt was in the coincidence of names with my Eera and her dwelling where she once lived?
Just another folly of mine.

(...so it turned out that I was neither a wolf nor a hooey-pricker, but an ordinary dog in the manger.
Like those kings that sent their divorced wives under the home arrest in a monastery.
Although, if the monastery has a proper gardener with a good lever, as depicted by Boccaccio…
Again, I am being carried away with making rational plans for royals as if I don’t have problems of my own…)

But it was Natasha who found for me the solution to the titanically insurmountable problem of turning the manuscripts into typewritten text.
She said there was a typing pool on the street connecting the Square of Konotop Divisions and the Sennoy Market.
Possibly, someone there would agree to type my translations... 

The two-story house of the typing pool looked like the Cherevko’s school.
From the entrance, a straight flight of wooden stairs led on the second floor where, in two adjacent rooms, a dozen of typists with amazing speed were chirping their typewriters. 

One of them, named Valya, in a short blond haircut, agreed to type the shortest from the short stories from the thin copybook which I brought with me for a test.
She appointed a day for me to come for the finished text.
Taming my heart beat, I said I had more translations.
She replied I could bring them too, by one or two at a time.
I asked her about the payment, but she waved the question away... 

Two, maybe three months I was visiting the typing pool on the days said by Valya.
I approached the house from the opposite sidewalk, in the best traditions of underground conspirators and secret agents.
Diving in the wide open door of the entrance I cautiously crept to the second floor – just only not to shoo off the crazy luck.

Passing to Valya the copybook with the last of the stories, I again tried to find out about the payment, and she again dismissively shook her head.
Labor must be rewarded, so I decided to pay anyway, if not with money, then in kind.

Near the tram stop by the Peace Square, on the first floor of the five-story block, stretched a line of shops hanging over the sidewalk with their slightly drooping shop windows. 
The last in their row was ‘The Flowers’ on the right, and the first, close to the square corner, ‘The Jewelry’.
There, after several circles around the glass box-cabinets with exorbitantly expensive necklaces, bracelets, and gold rings, I bought a silver chain for 25 rubles. 
As a case for it, a round lacquered powder box with ornament was purchased for 5 rubles plus.
However, that was from ‘The Souvenirs’ department in the Department Store.

Collecting the typewritten pages of the last story, I gave Valya the powder box and asked to look under the lid.
She picked up from it a long thin chain of white metal.
‘Melchior?’ asked her the typist from the next desk.
I did not explain anything to anyone: whoever wanted would find a way to check what was of what.
That month, the alimony to Nezhin and Konotop again nosedived to 15 rubles each...

A couple of days before the May Day I again felt like giving in to rituals.

From 13 Decemberists, I brought a piece of a bright red cloth, 40×40 cm, to the site in the locomotive depot.
I nailed it to a two-meter beam from the pile of remnants of former trestles, and it turned out to be a cheerful flag.
So that it was not in the way with the work of our team, I fixed it on the finished corner of the third-floor walls and there it splashed happily in the spring wind, above the river of railway tracks streaming towards the station. 

Peter Kyrpa asked me if I was again for it and I drove him a fool about the day of international solidarity of the working class people.
He promised me that soon they would come after me, but our team did not support him.
Laying the courses of brick in the wall, we sometimes looked back at the ripples in the flaunting red above our stooped working class backs. 

On the morning of May Day, in jeans and a T-shirt, I went out to the veranda to put on my shoes.
My parents also were there.
For many years already they consider themselves not obliged to go out for the demonstration.
I sat down on a small stool made by golden hands of my father to tie the strings of my black leather shoes.

‘You’re not going anywhere,’ my mother said and stood between me and the glazed veranda door.
‘You’ll stay home.’ confirmed my father and bolted the door with latch produced by him at the RepBase.
The happening looked like a home arrest without trial and investigation.
Still sitting, I ducked my head and in a low voice started a plaintive song:

‘Oh, Dnipro, Dnipro,
You’re a mighty stream,
With the clouds afloat above you...’

I did not know any more word from that song, so I got up and took a step towards the door.
My father seized my neck with the grip of his working-class arms of a hammerer, diesel engine tamer, and skillful locksmith. 
I always admired the bumps of his biceps.
My mother hung on my opposite shoulder.
Dragging their total weight, I continued slow progress towards the door.
There I pulled the latch aside, wriggled out of the suffocating grasp of the two opponents and jumped off the porch onto the brick path to the gate.
‘Bastard!’ shouted my father.
‘Scoundrel!’ backed him up my mother.
With a victorious sneer I exclaimed:
‘Ca-up, Mom!’

(...in our family tradition, at the age of two I pronounced ‘catch up!’ that way…)
