
Since then I stopped speaking to my parents and I dropped participating in the May and November demonstrations.
Instead, on reaching the Professions street, I turned left and walked to the very outskirts, where the huttas were replaced with meadows and the trees of the forest belt along the railroad embankment.
From there a deserted dirt road led me to the station of Kukolka.
I did not go to the station though but after a couple of kilometers followed the solitary track branching from the main railway. 
It was not used by trains, it was a reserve track in case of war.
Such case would make Konotop a target for bombardment, as a strategically important junction, and the reserve track detoured the would-be-destroyed city.

Along with that track over empty fields, I reached the forest by the Seim river. 
To the Seim itself I went out not far from the local train stop ‘Pryseymovye’ and walked to the place on its bank where once, still unmarried, I spent a day with Eera.
In that spot, I read an issue of ‘Morning Star', almost completely, bypassing the last sports page which I always ignored anyway. 
The newspaper I left in the grass on the bank, maybe would come in handy for someone.

The return journey ran along the main two-track embankment.
I entered Konotop together with it and for a long time continued walking along the gardens, right up to the second bridge, where the embankment turned to the railway station. 
There we parted and I went on, by the outskirts, along with the Swamp. 
Already in the evening darkness, I crossed the Bogdan Khmelnitsky street behind the old cemetery and through the Sosnovska street reached the terminal of tram 3, from where to 13 Decemberists there remained hop, skip and a jump.

On the whole, it was like whirling in a wide vicious circle with a return to the starting point after walking all day. 
The music from the demonstrations loudspeakers was substituted with self-made marching chants, like:

‘So what about
are we laughing
while our shoes
 this trail is roughing?’

But all that was in the future, and for the very first time, I did not have ‘Morning Star', instead of which there was a pinprick feeling in my chest on the left. 
And it did not want to disappear no matter how often I scratched the T-shirt in that area.
Even at night the unpleasantness persistently stayed by me, so in the morning I decided to have a session of labor therapy.

I went to the locomotive depot, penetrated its deserted and quietude spelled grounds, because of the second holiday day, and went to the construction site of the administrative building.
At the hillock of white silicate bricks brought by dump trucks, I planted an empty pallet and started to stack bricks on it.
At times it was necessary to press my chest with the left elbow because the pin there got replaced with a thick knitting needle. 

When all the twelve rows of bricks were stacked up on the pallet, I told myself that my case was not terminal and climbed to the incomplete third floor.
There I took the Jolly Roger from the corner of the building, slipped it into a hole in the slabs and buried with a dried mortar and other debris.

Kyrpa’s threats remained just empty words, that summer I was never taken to Romny.
Might it be I had grown wiser? 
I doubt it.
It’s just because I had not run into a sore spot of some high-ranking bitch.

By the middle of May, the needle, or pin, or whatever it was to pierce my chest, gradually dissolved and many years later I realized that it had been the first of heart attacks I experienced...

In my rough plan cropped up another, but the pleasant detail, that of assembling the typewritten pages into one complete volume of stories. 
For that purpose, I bought a folder from the Department Store, with a hard plastic cover and nickel-plated rings inside. 
In folders of that sort, they usually keep yearly general accounting reports and stack them on the shelves in series of the like folders. 
Sturdy, respect inspiring things.
To punch the holes for the rings in the pages of the text, I borrowed the puncher of the secretary in the SMP-615 administrative building.
The new boss grew green when saw me in his poultry farm, however, his sore spots could not be yet considered high-ranking enough.

The folder with the collection of translated short stories was holstered into a pretty looking plastic bag and I took it—bugle your trumpets, fanfarade! Roll, timpani, roll!—in the capital city of Kiev, to the book publishing house ‘Dnipro’.

In the first room, where I proudly proclaimed that—here! here!—I had a collection of translations of short stories by William Somerset Maugham, the jovial young man informed that he was not the person in charge of Maugham and the expert I needed was to be found two offices further down the corridor.
If would I like him to have me seen over there?
With dignified gratitude, I declined.

At the indicated office there sat a fat, but also young man staring with disgust at a skinny pile of typewritten pages inside an open file of purple cardboard spreading its short white strings upon his desk.
He reluctantly opened the heavy hard-plastic-armored file that I handed him over his desk and glanced at the title of the first story in the collection.
‘The Rain.’
He shut the file and asked who I was sent by.

In confused bewilderment, my mind revved to its limits.
Forbidden to come here on your own accord?
Too high circles.
I should have been sent by the duke*** for the courtier-receptionist to guess whose vassal I was.
He would compare the duke’s weight to that of his suzerain—marquis***—to know how to handle me.
And then one phone call to verify, just in case, and he would know which drawer to safely stick it in. 
And cherish no hope, under this polished system, to find a hole for the f-f.. freelancer-outsider.

He, just in case, opened the volume once again, someplace in the middle, and immediately slammed it shut.

‘I'm just an errand-boy,' answered I. ‘They asked me to take it to your publishing house, so I brought it here.' 
‘Who?’
I opened the file to show the sticker on inside of its back cover with my Konotop address. 
‘This friend of mine.’ said I.

It was below his position to talk to a messenger who was not sent by even a petty baron but from nondescript Konotop or something like that. 
I coldly replied to his official goodbye and left.

The next evening, in Konotop, coming from work, I saw on my shelves a weighty postal package wrapped in their mustard-brown paper.

 I had no reason to open the parcel.
What for?
By its size and familiar weight, I knew what was inside. 
The annual report for the past six years of my life comprising 472 typewritten pages of 35 short stories by Maugham translated into Ukrainian.
It’s strange the parcel post hadn’t reached Konotop before I came back from Kiev.
And it was also strange that the unopened package with unread stories left me so frostbitten indifferent. 

(...as it turned out, those six years did not fit into the feudally regulated grid of book publishing system.

‘Who has sent you to our rectangularly ordered reality?’
‘Sorry, I’ve knocked on a wrong door.’

“Farewell, dear peers and peerixes, sirs and sirixes!”
As my Uncle Vadya used to say, and he was a great connoisseur of vassal dependencies from the school textbook of the Middle Ages History...)



