~~~ The Solitary Barge Hauler ~~~

My cheeky snubs to the people’s judge straightened out my chest, but not for long.
Everything fell back to the same 'O! Woe to me!' rut – what for? I loved so much! I always did my best!.
Why me?

The unanswerable questions exchanged for the sticky languishing dream that one of these days Eera would come and everything would be fine again…
The fact that Eera through that divorce, logically and inevitably cleared her way for further life without me around, did not at all diminished the longing for the unreachable neither shooed off the hope that everything, somehow, will become fine…

However, uninterrupted suffering is a rather tiresome occupation and I gradually came to the opinion that the divorce should be somehow celebrated.
But what way?
I knew no rituals on this subject and could only improvise.
One thing was clear though, I needed a day, not like the other days. 
And it was for such a day that I went to Kiev.

The Indian summer that year transgressed all the common sense limits and, despite it was the first week of November, I went there in my jacket.
Taking into account the calendar depth of the autumn season, the dark gray waistcoat went along with the jacket.
It did not belong to any three-piece suit but was sewn back in my school years by that same sharp-nosed tailor in her shop next to the bus station. 

That was my rig (plus a shirt and pants) when I emerged from the metro station on the Khreschatyk street and slowly moved along its gorgeous sidewalks with mighty chestnuts.
I went down to the Red Army street cobbled with polished stone and moved further down its slope to ‘The Foreign Book’ store in order to make myself the event-marking present I had chosen during the business trip.
A slight worry nagged me on the way: could it be they had already sold it?
Yet I was almost sure and not much surprised when the bright red jacket of the ‘Chamber’s 20th Century Dictionary’ loomed from the same very shelf.

The salesman, observing my festive outfit—from under the waistcoat there also peeped the open collar of my faded red shirt—asked politely if I would really want that particular book.

(...I was not surprised by his doubt – in that year of the then current 20th century, not everyone could afford a book for 31 rubles 60 kopecks. 
Except, of course, the bricklayers celebrating their divorce…)

I left the store with the thick volume tightly wrapped in their special lavender colored packing paper.
It had to be left in an automatic storage cell at the station.
Yet how to get there? On the subway again?
No, it was another kind of a day.
And I approached the curb with flocks of taxis shooting by.

From the station I also went to ‘The Hunter’ store, at the address given me by Grinya, he wanted some folding fishing rod from there.

After the shopping spree, there began the cultural part of the program. 
The House of Organ Music was filled that evening with the sun shimmering upon the sea in Debussy’s pieces.
Bright sparkling on the happy ripples of waves.
As I was a child, my father told me that listening such kind of music people are to draw mental pictures fitting it.
I could never follow his advice.
The sounds overpower all clever intentions, subdue and leave no space for anything else.

In the post-concert twilight on the sidewalk, it was already really chill and the hunger woke up. 
The taxi took me to the restaurant of ‘The Golden Wheat’ hotel.
First, I tried to rent a room for the night, but the receptionist, assessing my rig incongruent with the season and lack of luggage, cut me off with the usual question below the belt: did I have a reservation?
They knew how to cope with vagrant freelancers.

In the restaurant, to orient myself, I ordered a bottle of wine for a starter and a man with a beret on his head got seated at the table opposite me.

(...when there is a beret, but no briefcase about the man, then you are dealing with an electrician…)

We did not have time to drink even a glass when a young blonde guy landed on the third side of the table. 
He for some reason began to put his fingers in the pose ‘I’ll take your eyes out!’
The electrician grew quiet under his beret.
In my holiday program, there were planned no gladiatorial amusements so I got upon my feet:
‘All right, young man. I leave this feast to you. Enjoy!’

I went to the waiters, paid for the wine and left.
The blonde rushed after me to the lobby, but of the three glazed entrance vestibules, only one was opened to the porch, seeing me through lots of glass doors he, in his haste, could not choose the right one.
I waved my hand for a goodbye and went away.

Sleeping in a waiting hall of the station would hardly add festiveness for the day.
Another taxi driver took me to the hotel ‘Old Prague’.
The young receptionist there also picked up the subject of a reservation, but suddenly turned merciful and gave a room. 
She warned it was more expensive, which was understandable though because, in fact, there were two rooms with a sideboard in the hallway one.

Getting there, I decided it was enough of putting fate to test with my attire and ordered dinner in the room – fish with potatoes and wine, let it be white, please.

Waking up late in the morning, I checked out and went for a walk around the city.
On the sidewalk near the Golden Gate, a blond young man, ran panting past, evidently one from the monad of that boob who got stuck in the glass labyrinth of the vestibules at the Golden Wheat. 
It looked like the whole their monad would have a tough job of getting from the mess they got into with the feast I generously threw to them. 
But the fool ran into it himself.

On the descent to the Bessarabian Market, I decided it was time to dine and turned into the restaurant ‘Leningrad’.
In front of me a group of Negroes entered the same place, however, I was anything but a racist and followed them.
Still, I did not like the over-fat scruff of their file closer. 
A piece of obese Africa.

In the afternoon gloom of the restaurant I could not see where they managed to dissipate but I remained the only guest in the room.
I ordered something ‘in the pot’, so it was written in the menu.
They brought potatoes mixed with meat and brown souse, but all that in a ceramic pot, indeed.

Eating from the pot was very uncomfortable and too much hot as well.
But I guessed to pour part of the steaming stuff into a plate on the table and then was gradually adding to it from the pot.
Before leaving the restaurant, I entered its silent empty toilet and went out a completely different person.
Not the one who had come to ‘Leningrad’.
The lines by Ivan Franko were slowly coiling in the head:

‘One by one get severed the hobbles,
We’ve been tied with to the life of the past...’

And not just that.
The main difference between me entering and me leaving the restaurant was the absence of the jacket which I intentionally left hanging in the toilet. 
It was the wedding jacket in which I was registered as Eera’s husband in the ZAGS of Nezhin.
Besides, it was the same one which survived my unsuccessful attempt at leaving it in the toilet of restaurant ‘Bratislava' in Odessa. 
Perhaps, the time had not been ripe then yet.

Was the act on the celebration program?
No, most likely it was an impromptu inspiration, but I liked it.

Eased and relieved, I lightly walked up the Khreschatyk.
It was being prepared for the 7th of November demonstration.
The troops of the Kiev garrison were training their parade step and a brass band was loudly playing.

Along the sidewalk, they had put endless board stands for spectators, just three steps, but very wide indeed, so that they would watch the demonstration and wave their hands in a show of approbation and joy. 
Before the demonstration, there remained two more days and the steps were still empty. 

I walked along the middle one, clicking my heels against its thick planks, a man in his prime, in a red shirt under a gray waistcoat, and the sun rays vibrated through the branches of chestnuts.
I walked to the metro station and was ready again to the trenches, walls, and partitions.
People really need holidays...

The fact that Panchenko, as if having nothing better to do, hurled cast iron four-section radiator from a window on the fourth floor – without even peeping out, in case someone gets crushed – had a very reasonable rationale.

With that bolt out of the blue, he signaled to all who might be concerned, that the veteran jailbird's balls were still unshaven and under his eight-wedge cap—sported by toughs in the 50's—he still was quite a crazy machine. 

The signal was addressed, first of all, to his superintendent in charge of writing work orders for calculating Panchenko’s monthly payment, and to the chief mechanic in whose division he turned a fresh leaf to start a new honest life.
And it was high time already for a mujik in his mid-fifties.

Of course, it did not concern him at all, that after the second time in Romny I lost the position of the trade-union visitor at the SMP-615. 

That, at first somewhat chaotic position, I had managed to bring to the state of impeccable perfection.
Forgotten were the times when someone from the jacks or carpenters would return to work after a couple days in the railway hospital with disparaging complains about my neglecting to visit them there whereas no bricklayer on our team was ever ignored.
But how could I know?
Their foremen did not report to me! 

The problem was solved radically – at the end of every working day, I called the hospital registry office to ask if they had taken for treatment any employee of the SMP-615. 

Then there arose the question of right usage for the three rubles which the trade union allocated for visiting a hospital patient.
How to spend the sum, so that each sufferer received an equal amount of consolation regardless of their age, gender, and other inclinations? 

Not at once, but that issue also found its own and—without indulging in false modesty—a superbly clear-cut solution.

One ruble was spent on drinks – the invariable three bottles: one of beer, one of lemonade, one of kefir. 
Cakes, marshmallow and/or other sweets were bought for the second ruble.
For spending the final, third one, I went to the railway station and from the wide counter of the news stall where, next to the entrance to the restaurant, were chosen the always popular cartoon magazine ‘Perets', the Konotop city newspaper ‘The Soviet Banner'—which my father affectionately called ‘our liar cur'—and a couple of the central ones for the change. 
And, with a complete and ready visiting package, I went to the hospital

Frictions arose later when I handed in the report for the spent three rubles to be reimbursed by the trade union. 
Slaushevsky rigorously protested mentioning the bottle of beer in the report.
The trade union and beer are two things completely incompatible.
Mutually exclusive.
Then, as a compromise, I suggested him to write the reports himself and I would sign anything.

That’s what a beautifully balanced shebang was left to live only until the November report-election trade union meeting of the SMP-615.
Still and yet, I had managed to feed Panchenko with waffles...

Hearing on the telephone of the registry, that they had a certain Panchenko from the SMP-615, I realized there was no time to lose, I did not want to take risks of a sudden discharge.
First of all, I bought waffles for him.
Then again waffles.
And once more – waffles, for the whole ruble, all in different wrappers and from different shops…

...I praised the interior of the hospital hall with the already dark evening outside the windows.
The plastic bag issued a soft tempting tinkle when I handed it over to him.
He could not refuse, he, as any other worker of the SMP-615, knew that there was beer.

Why was I so uncontrollably laughing wandering from shop to shop in search of waffles of different colors?
It’s hard to explain, but I laughed until tears streamed down my cheeks.

A couple of days later, Lyda, a bricklayer from our team, asked me confidentially in the trailer:
‘Visited Panchenko?’
‘Sure.’
‘With cakes?’
‘No. For him – only waffles.’
She knew that I never lied, for the principle’s sake.
I fell silent, and again I had to restrain inappropriate laughter.

In a moment, Panchenko himself entered the trailer for some reason.
Carefully, weighing each of her words, Lyda asked if I had visited him.
‘Yes.’
‘With the package?’
‘Well, there were some newspapers. I did not even read them.’
No more words were said.

The rest she expressed at home to her husband Mykola.
That he was already a family man and let him listen less to that wafflister Panchenko…

I did not immediately understand why the divorce proceedings left me with a feeling of some incompleteness. 
Something was amiss.

(...the trademark of my stupidity is that in the end, I get it, of which, at first, did not even guess to think about…) 

It turned out, that the people’s judge had completely forgotten to mention alimony!
As if I was childless.
The task of correcting the judicial error lay on my shoulders.

Since December, I started sending monthly 30 rubles to Red Partisans.
For that transaction on the payday, I visited the post office opposite the bus station. 
And, as you were not my only child, I sent the same amount to 13 Decemberists as well.

For several years ‘30 to Nezhin, 30 to Konotop’ had become my financial way of life and the most repeated line in the pocket notebook.
Why just that sum?
I do not know.

In total that was half of my earnings.
For the second half, apart from my hygiene-bath-laundry expenses, I sometimes bought books and every day had a midday havvage in the canteens.

At first, my mother tried to convince me that the Konotop’s ‘30’ I could bring home and pass the sum from hand to hand, although she did not need that money, my argument was it was more convenient for me to do the way I did it.

My status of an alimony-payer was not a secret for our team, with my principle of answering direct questions directly, it was enough for them to ask why each payday I entered the post office by the bus station. 
And some women bricklayers also put that question: why 30 rubles exactly?
Restraining a wave of anger welling up in me from I didn’t know where, I answered no more was necessary and were I paid 3 000 rubles a month the ‘30’ to Nezhin and Konotop would remain just ‘30’.

There were times, when I was not able to send out the alimony and then the line ‘30 to Nezhin, 30 to Konotop’ had to wait until the required sum was scratched up and after sending it a tick popped up next to the line.
At certain periods, I sent only 15 rubles each way.

One of such periods followed a talk between my mother and my sister Natasha, which I accidentally overheard.
They were discussing Eera’s selling my sheepskin coat and keeping all the money to herself.

I had noted the disappearance of the sheepskin coat, but I had no idea where it was gone or why. 

Now, to restore the reputation of Caesar's wife, I had to lower the alimony rate to 15 rubles, until the sum of 90 rubles was collected.
I took the money to Nezhin and in the post office on the Red Partisans street, I asked an occasional visitor to fill out the money order addressing as I dictated.
In the space reserved for a personal note, I wrote in a clumsy handwriting, slanting left: 
‘for the sheepskin coat.’

Why 90 rubles?
The price of a new sheepskin coat with longer skirts at the market amounted to 120 rubles.
Mine was short and still from the Object – the rest is pure arithmetic.

On receiving so large money remittance, my mother wanted to ask me about something, but at that time I was not on speaking terms with my parents, so it was pointless to ask the deaf and dumb fool of me about ‘for the sheepskin coat.’

(...here it is interesting to note, that the wisdom of outsiders cannot make us smarter.
In one of his stories, telling about a young man who stopped communicating with his parents, Maugham remarks that in this harsh and hostile world people will always find a way to make their situation even worse.
I agreed with the wisdom of maxim, but I did not use it.

It took ten years of separation—four of which were spent in a full-scale war—so that when I arrived on a visit to Konotop, I started again to talk with my parents. 
And it was pleasant to pronounce the words ‘Mom’, Dad’…

But only it just seemed to me, that I was not addressing my parents, or that it was not exactly I talking to them.
Probably, the habit had been lost, or maybe because that all of us, by that time, had already changed so much…)

As expected, trade union positions were closed to me, but no one was able to deprive me of the right to fulfill my public duty.
I mean the monthly watches of the volunteer public order squad.

By seven o’clock in the evening, the SMP-615 male employees gathered in a long room of the ‘stronghold of the public order squad’ with its entrance from the end wall of the endless five-story block by the Under-Overpass.
That same where there was the workers’ canteen number three, at the other end.

Mykola Kot, a driver of the truck crane, came one of the first and, without removing his hat of black rabbit fur, sat at a side desk to flip through a pile of newspapers accumulated there since our turn of duty month before.
The men gradually collected into the room and, sitting down on chairs along the walls, began to gossip of nothing in particular.

Kot, still getting acquainted with the press from the days of the past, predicted that were we even to start our yacking from as high as about space orbital stations the conversation would inevitably slip over to the female twat. 
And he, as a rule, was right.

At about ten past seven, there came a militia officer—ranking from lieutenant to captain—contributed to the mujiks’ gossip and then took from a drawer in his desk and handed out red armbands with black inscription ‘public order squad’.
Then we, in threes, left the stronghold to patrol the evening sidewalks in vigil beats – to the station, the Depot Street, the Loony and along the Peace Avenue, but no further than the bridge in the railway embankment. 

The round took about forty-five minutes, then we returned to the base—some of the threes noticeably tipsy—and after a more enliven yackety session set off for the final watch so that by ten o'clock we would go home until the next duty turn in a month. 

A couple of times KGB officers appeared at our evenings with their instructions.
The first time it happened on the occasion of the upcoming Holiday of the October Revolution, and we were instructed to be especially vigilant not to allow provocative pranks.
When the KGBist left, a belated militia officer appeared with the question if we had learned it well that seeing a spy we should immediately grab him by the collar.

The second and last time, another KGB officer shared secret information to facilitate the capture, ASAP, of a former KGB worker who disappeared in an unknown direction. 
She could change her hairstyle and color of her hair, explained the KGB officer showing us her black-and-white portrait, yet she got a special sign for identification – a contraceptive coil of Dutch production inserted in her vagina.
Our mujiks did not immediately understand what that all was about but in a moment poured so suggestive questions that the KGBist thought it best to get out. 
After all, he only executed his orders and was not responsible for the stupidity thereof. 

In one of the vigil rounds, the guys from my ‘trinity' gave me a slip. 
Walking in a group of three wearing red armbands, looks more or less sane, but when looking around you see that among the passers-by along the sidewalk of trampled snow under the windows of Deli 6 you are the only one with a red rag on your arm then, you feel as if you were not all there.

Putting on a brazen mug that I did not care a fig, I went on to the station square.
However, the carpenter Mykola and the driver Ivan could not be made out from among the hasty silhouettes of passers-by.
Some of the younger people looked back at a strange phenomenon – insolent solo public order patroller.

It did not take to be a genius for figuring out that my co-volunteers had pulled off the armbands, bought a bottle of ‘mutter’ in some grocery store and now, in a secluded place, were gurgling in turn from the neck to tone up and get warmer.
Where?
That was the question.

Most likely in the quiet mess of short lanes and dead ends between Deli 6 and the high first platform of the station.
In that jumble of warehouses, venereal dispensary, a couple of private huttas without kitchen gardens and other board buildings.
There I turned not because of desiring a share from their ‘mutter’, but in order to make them ashamed and perplexed at the strength of the deductive method that could detect them in a quiet nook under a lamppost.

But instead of the carpenter with the driver, in the dim cone of light from the lamp, I ran into a genre scene.

A romantic pair—a girl walking with a youth—were intercepted by their mutual acquaintance, a burly young guy, who started sorting it out.
The appearance of the fourth superfluous with a red armband slowed down the action only for a minute.
Realizing that no more vigilantes were to be expected, the tough started to kick the ass of his smaller but luckier in love opponent.
The bantam fell on one knee and throwing aside his jacket of ‘fish-fur’ fabric on the snow, next to his hat already knocked off there, rushed into a retaliatory attack.
I stayed a non-interfering on-looker with a red rag on my arm.

The girl picked up the jacket with the hat and held them, as Eera had once been holding my rabbit fur hat in the main square of Nezhin.

The forces were too unequal, the lightweight lay in the snow, the girl folded his clothes under the lamp and took the winner by the arm and went with him away into the labyrinth of the snow-clad tangled alleys.

The defeated rose and, seeing I was still there, burst out with a confusedly ardent oration to the tune about the strength of the spirit before which the physical strength was nothing because only the spirit had power.
In Konotop every second one is a born lord-speaker.

In order to morally support Demosthenes, I reported that during the fight the girl held exactly his things, and not the fur ‘potty’ hat of his opponent, which also had been knocked off in the snow.
Hearing the words of consolation, he shut up and hastily checked the pockets in his jacket because, with all innate love for oratorical art, the common sense is a more prominent feature when distinguishing a Konotoper...

And also nobody was able to forbid me to see to it that women of our team each year received on 8th of March flowers—callas—one flower for each female bricklayer, because I was not a millionaire and mujiks on our team, not every year guessed to ask how much I had paid and collect a ruble from a man. 
However, the reimbursement of expenses did not bother me much.
I made the discovery that I like to gift presents even more than getting them myself.
But first I had to find the city greenhouse.

It, actually, was as far as the hell itself.
You had to get off tram 2 one stop before reaching the route terminal.
Then take the left turn, and stomp for half a kilometer along the streets from the Civil War. 
Like, the Yudenich Street, or, say, the Denikin Street.
The names though were quite Soviet, but the look and feel unmistakably White-guardian.

When I came to the greenhouse for the first time, the manager took me into a long greenhouse with its gable roof made of squares of muddy glass with rare large drops of water falling down from them.
She wanted me to make sure for myself that there were no flowers.

And those plantings had not yet matured, the callas there not ‘flared up’, they were just white flowers not turned into wide-lapeled muzzles.
And then, without the slightest trail of my tongue-tied speech problems, I gave out to her a sample piece of Konotop oratory.

That was to her, who passed every day among the greenery of the greenhouse beds, the callas seemed not ripe.
Yet for women on our bricklayer team, who day after day saw nothing but crashed bricks, mortar and icy hillocks of dirty snow, those callas, be it even in ‘un-flared-up’ form were the most beautiful flowers.

Since then, while I was working in our team, I never was said ‘no’ to in the city greenhouse on the eve of March 8.
And I proudly drove in a tramcar a cluster of green-and-white callas that would appear in ‘The Flowers’ store by the Peace Square no sooner than in a half month...

My decision was final and irrevocable – it’s time to sum it up.
The story I was translating should close the books.
That’s enough of Maugham for me.
Even the fact that the concluding story had to be translated twice could not shake my determination...

I was forced to translate it for the second time because of Tolik Polos path-lifted my briefcase.
It was actually empty, except for the copybook with the last translation, when in the morning I took the briefcase with me to take it after work to Zhomnir in Nezhin.
In the Settlement, there were no passers-by at such early an hour, at least along the railway tracks to the station. 

On reaching the concrete wall surrounding the KaPeVeRrZe Plant, I remembered I needed money for the train, which I had left behind.
I had to go back and that I did, leaving the briefcase to stand alone by the path of the service passage. 

Returning to the Settlement streets, I met only Tolik who walked in the opposite direction.
He also graduated School 13 but two years after me.
After grabbing the forgotten money, I retracted back to the path by the railway tracks.
The briefcase was nowhere to see.
Only Tolik and I had walked that path.
Or had there been someone else?

The answer was received a week later on tram 3. 

Tolik did not say 'hello' to me, he only was making faces from his seat in style of Slavik Aksyanov at the mine of Dophinovka.
But—most importantly—his right hand was plastered.
Was there a need for more direct evidence that it was he who picked up a lonely briefcase in a desolate place?
Not for me.

(… sometimes in my life, I am able not only see but even read the signs…) 

Actually, the work that followed was not a re-translation, it was too fresh in my mind.
One month later I took my last translation to Zhomnir, but already without the briefcase.
So, albeit with a month’s delay, my decision to part with Maugham was executed.
However, it was only a part of a broader plan of actions.

As any other of my plans, it was lacking clear concrete details.

My plans, they are rather no plans at all, but, like, the feelings that it is necessary to do this or that.
Details to the plans come only afterward – in the course of execution. 

The broad plan mentioned before, arose because, finally, I realized that Zhomnir would do ‘match-making’ for none of my translations.
Never, nowhere.
It did not matter why, the main thing was, that it’s for sure.

So what now?
Very simple, the issue of publication should be solved in a make-it-yourself way. 
To go that way, I had to take away from Zhomnir all my translations in thin school copybooks with covers of different colors, piled somewhere among papers stacks on the shelves in his archive chamber.

I arrived in Nezhin and announced to him about my intention to take back my still-not-alpha versions of Maugham in Ukrainian.
Zhomnir did not object and did not ask any questions.
He arranged a feast because during these years I became sort of a distant relative in his house. 
A poor, uninfluential one, but, at times, handy, say when pasting the living room of his apartment with new wallpaper... 

We sat at the square table, pushed from the wall to the center of the living room, and ate everything being brought by Maria Antonovna from the kitchen.
We drank strong village moonshine.
Zhomnir was enthusiastically discussing the gold pectoral of great artistic value, recently excavated from an ancient mound in the steppe.

Changing the subject, he asked what my current relations with Nezhin were, meaning Eera.
I proudly replied those relations proved to be fruitful, meaning you. 
Then I cautiously asked how Eera was.
‘How what?' answered Zhomnir. ‘Whoring around the city.' 

It rammed me in the solar plexus, although not as hard as the words of Eera that she had a certain Sasha, as she cared to inform my sister Natasha, who withheld the retelling until my divorce with Eera, to use it as a booby prize, I suppose.

Most of all I was struck by the complete coincidence of Zhomnir’s answer with the words of the mujik at the Konotop brick factory replying to my question about Olga.

(...for all the difference in educational and cultural level, when we need to knock our neighbor’s brains out, we use the same old good stone ax…)

When it was time to set off for my local train, Zhomnir put all the copybooks with my translations in a plastic bag, that become tight and heavy, and went out to escort me to the station.
That moonshine was really a strong stuff, but I remember how the electric train rolled up and with a hiss threw apart the door opening to the platform.
Refusing Zhomnir’s help, I went towards the round tunnel of the car vestibule with gleams of nickel-plated handrails on its sides.
Catching the left one, I climbed inside, went over to the opposite closed door and hung the bag on the top of the handrail there.
The last thing I heard was the sound of a door slamming together behind me...

When I slowly came to my senses, I still stood there, clutching in my left hand the top of the handrail by the closed door.
The train also stood motionless at the fourth platform of the Konotop railway station.
It was empty, because according to the schedule before its departure further to Khutor Mikhailovsky there was still an hour or two.

With my abdominal muscles turned stone hard and stopped breathing, I saw that the handrail was empty. 
On the other three handrails in the car vestibule, there was no plastic bag in sight. 
Slamming the sliding door, I went into the empty car and glanced along the empty rack rails above the windows.
I returned to the vestibule and exhaled: hooooey!

I did not feel like sitting in the leatherette-covered seats of the empty local train, and I went through the underground passage and over the station square to the Loony park, on a hard wooden bench. 
There I sat for a long time without any thoughts, only sometimes imagined myself in the form of a stupidly frozen statue above the handrail from which they were removing the plastic bag.
Who?!
What's the difference? 
Whoever it was the harvest did not bring them much of joy – some absolute uselessness.
If only to kindle the firewood in the stove, would do for a few winters…

After thoughtlessly sitting for about an hour, I remembered that it was the SMP-615 day of duty turn in the public order squad.
I dragged myself to the stronghold room to sit on further – indifferent, detached and silent.
Only with the arrival of the militia officer, I knew what to do next. 
‘Comrade Captain, lend me tree rubles till our next turn on duty.’
‘I do not lend in rubles. Only in days of arrest. Fifteen enough?’

His wit only confirmed the correctness of my plan.

The next day, three rubles were borrowed from our team and after work, I went to Nezhin. 
There, in the five-story block of the institute teachers in the Count’s Park, I found the apartment of ever smiling Nona.
I said that after several years of work, I lost all of my translations from Maugham.
Now, for their restoration, I needed the originals of the stories, all of which were collected in the four-volume edition by the Penguin Publishing House that was in her possession. 
Could she, please?. 
With her usual sweet smile, Nona brought the books, placed them into a plastic bag and handed over to me.
With what a joy my heart was pounding – thank you!

‘How do you like it, Maria Antonovna. This scoundrel of Ogoltsoff lost all of his translations in the local train!’
‘Because you shouldn't have made the poor boy drink so much!’

Maria Antonovna also did not know that all my misfortunes or joys, ups, and downs, all my pleasures, and deprivations sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who is now composing this letter to you lying in a one-person tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lap of the river named Varanda… 

‘The habit is given to us from above,
As a fit substitution for happiness...’

This immortal line of the great classic hints openly that for the third time in Romny they raked me up purely out of the developed habit.
And that time almost everyone in the SMP-615 knew that any other day they would pinch me...

Two years later, at an accidental meeting on the narrow trail along the railway embankment, behind the sports grounds on the outskirts of the engineering college, that knowledge was disclosed also to me by the retired major Petukhov, the then head of the personnel department of the SMP-615. 
Without any pressure or leading questions from my part, Petukhov told me how the superintendent Ivan almost every day came from the construction site to his office to call psychiatrist Tarasenko about my next deviations.

‘He sang this morning. Maybe it’s time?’
‘Let him sing.’
…
‘He wrote an explanatory note in verse.’
‘What note?’
‘He lost his helmet and I demanded an explanatory note of him. Will you come after him?’
‘Not yet.’
…
‘He shoved his shirt into a bridging slab hole and buried it with mortar.’
‘That’s it! Take care he doesn’t get away.’...

Singing at the working I allowed myself not every day, but rather often.
Sometimes, especially when a construction site in the At-Seven-Winds drowned in a dense cold fog, someone from our team would ask:
‘Sing it, Sehryoga!’

‘I had a wife,
She loved me so much,
And just one time she cheated,
And then she made her mind:
“Eh! One time, yes, and once again,
And many, many, many, many more times, yes...’

However, our team liked the Ballad of the Gypsum more:

‘Now I’m lying on my back, all plastered over,
Every member of mine is pre-packaged!..’

As for the helmet, it was not lost, it's just that I had shown off my gentlemanlity. 

I was walking among the construction sites of the At-Seven-Winds and by the nine-story block, there were female plasterers from the PMK-7. 
They picked some flowers in the fresh grass, most likely dandelions because yellow they were. 
They asked me for a plastic bag and I, with a wide hussar gesture, threw them my helmet to use as a basket for collected flowers.
I even pointed out to them the brown trailer of our team where to return my helmet. 
Since then I had seen neither them nor my helmet... 

Of all our team it was only I who put on a helmet that’s why the superintendent Ivan made a fuss with his explanatory note.
But calling the note I wrote on his demand verses was just a flattery, it was nothing more than vers libre…

Well, about the shirt, yes.
With that shirt, I ran into it flatly. 
That time I imprudently indulged in my bias to self-invented rituals.

The first day of summer had come.
Well, was it possible not to observe the event?

In summer, even if you wear nothing but a tank top under your spetzovka, you still swim in your sweat.
A shirt in summer is a superfluous element.

That green shirt of some kind of finely creased synthetics I had been wearing for six years.
And that bitch of a shirt did not want to wear off, and I had to sweat in it like in any other synthetic fabric, in spite of its being finely creased.
And so, on June 1, when I got out of the trailer, the green shirt with its sleeves tied together, was a wrap on top of my black spetzovka put on my stark naked torso.
I went up to the working place and buried the shirt in one of many holes in the floor slabs between the unfinished walls.
There were no garbage bins at the site and just to throw the shirt into the ochco of the outhouse did not seem right – we had shared sweat for so many years. 

Then I went to the third floor of the next section and laid the traverse wall with ventilation ducts alone until Peter Lysoon appeared to call me to the trailer.
Along the way, he somehow kept his eyes off me and spoke on esoteric botanical topics.

All those strange symptoms flew out of my head when in front of our trailer I saw a van-UAZ with a burly militiaman next to it in his forage cap with red band and psychiatrist Tarasenko.
Our team with overseer Karenin and superintendent Ivan formed an uneven semicircle about the visitors. 

Tarasenko announced to the audience that my behavior had always been abnormal and today I stepped over the line with burying my shirt into the hole in a concrete slab.
Then he democratically asked the crowd if they had noted additional anomalies about me.
The people responded with silence.
One of our women endeavored to hint that the shirt was completely worn out, and Tarasenko, so that avoid meandering discussion of the topic, ordered me to go into the trailer and change my clothes.

I obeyed unquestioningly and then I climbed into the van with some drunkard in its hold and we were taken away. 
During the stop near the Medical Center, the drunk tried to convince me to jerk the claws in different directions – the militiaman would not be able to chase both at once. 
I kept quiet, realizing that it was better forty-five days under syringes than the rest of my life on the run.

Then a young plain-clothes guard joined us together with one more drunk and, along the trodden road, we drove to Romny.
On the way, we made a stop in some roadside village to load into the hold a couple of old woman in black and a troubled man who swore to all the present, in turn, that he did not remember anything of what was yesterday…

Upon arrival at the psychiatric hospital, we were taken in different directions and for some reason, I was X-rayed in a supine position. 
Probably, they were just testing a newly installed equipment.
I did not see any of the drunkards anymore, in the madhouse such cases were taken care of by unit three, and unit five was waiting for me...

The regular brainwashing through my ass again passed in the Area and overcrowded wardroom for the night repose.
In all the categories higher than that of the departed, of the acquaintances, I saw only Sasha, who knew my brother Sasha, but he slept without ever waking up. 

As a veteran and for the sake of philanthropy, I turned to the head doctor with a plea to exchange my iminazine injections with iminazine pills.
She promised to think it over and ten days before the end of the term she canceled one of the three my daily injections.
And for that, I now recollected her name – Nina. 

Nothing more remarkable happened, except that I learned the way to provide first aid in case of seizure of epilepsy.
It is necessary to grab the epileptic by the legs and drag away from the Area into the shade under the canopy.
There he would go on with beating his back against the ground, but gradually reducing the tempo until he comes to himself.
Some halfwits consider it useful to drive flies with their dirty hands from his face, but that does not affect the course of the seizure...

On that trail under the railway embankment, Petukhov did not tell me just one thing – why I was so closely followed and taken under so unremitting control. 
But there was no need for it because of I knew it as well as he did.

My arrest took roots in the reconstruction of the maternity hospital, a long two-story building by the crossroads of the Lenin street and the descent from the Department Store.
Each construction enterprise of Konotop was doing their part in the works.
The SMP-615 was responsible for several partitions and bathrooms in the right wing of the first floor.
Four plasterers and I were sent to execute the task.
We managed in one week.

When the women were already plastering the partitions I had laid, in the corridor appeared a man in a clean suit and with a necktie.
Beholding the four yummy females, the visitor began to spread out his peacock tail against the backdrop of the wretch of a jack for which he counted me.
I politely asked him to keep his ardor in check and not cough in all directions.
‘Hey, you! Know who against you’re ramming? I am the First Secretary of the City Party Committee.’
‘And I am a bricklayer of the fourth category.’
‘Okay! You’ll know me!’

He left and half an hour later our chief engineer flew into the corridor, out of his breath,  because he was the SMP-615 party committee chairman too.
‘How d’you dare to use foul language at the first secretary of the city party committee?’
The plasterers unanimously testified that there was not a single taboo word on my part.
The information did not console the chief engineer, but he left.
That’s all.
Nothing could be simpler – a male with levers of power in his command versus a male in a mortar splattered spetzovka.

The only thing that really hurt me was the accusation of using the derivatives from ‘fuck’.
In all the years in the SMP-615, I righteously refrained from using such words even deep in my mind... 

At the beginning of autumn, when soaping myself in the bathhouse I suddenly discovered my stomach became bulging like the rigid forewings of a May beetle and almost same way unwilling to retract.
Soon my mother noticed that I was turning double-chinned. 
After one of the evening dinners at 13 Decemberists, she put her hand on my shoulder with a victorious announcement:
‘You're getting fat, brother Rabbit! Relax, so it should be, you're from our breed.' 
I did not answer to the smile on her round face under which—I knew that without looking—the, even more, round figure was expanding, and I kept silent too. 
I did not want to be such a breed and become round. 
I would not succumb to their iminazine!
Some radical measures were the must.

Start with those same dinners at 13 Decemberists, my mother was skillful at piling no less than two servings of rice or potatoes on a plate.
At the same time, everything was so delicious, that you imperceptibly ate all of it. 

The first step became the repeal of bread.
Okay, I eat as much as you care to load, but I’m not obliged to eat bread and I will not.
And I stopped eating it even in the canteens.

As for the ‘will not’ that was a sham because I always liked bread, especially rye bread, moreover when it’s warm.
I was able to finish off a loaf of such bread at one sitting, without any stuffing apart from the words I learned from my father: 
‘Soft bread and mouth wide make heart rejoice at every bite.' 

A month later, seeing that the breadless diet was of no help, I just stopped going to the canteens at the midday break.
That equalized the impaired balance.
A breakfast in the canteen plus two servings at the dinner in the evening made for obtaining three meals.

And what about the midday havvage?
I devoured, in the words of our team, ‘Vsesvit’, which I each month brought to the trailer for reading.
As a result, by the New Year, in the same city bathhouse behind the square of Konotop Divisions, I proudly observed my sunken, like on a healthy wolf, stomach.
I always liked it to be that form.
Some concave-bellied Narcissus.

(...there are lots of words you seemingly know – heard, read, and even pronounced more than once.
Sure, I know the word!.. until asked about its meaning.
But such inquisitive bastards are rarely met and you continue to interpret seemingly known words the way you vaguely feel they should mean, sort of...

The word ‘asceticism’ is one of the brightest examples of how people do not understand themselves what they are saying.
90% of the population, to whom the word, like, is clear, would imagine a man worn-out by self-torture in unkempt, tattered beard around burning eyes. 
This is just as wrong as the word ‘athlete’ to designate exclusively sumo fighters.
In fact, the root meaning of ‘asceticism’ is conveyed by the word ‘training’.
If you are eager to win a beer tournament and keep drinking three liters of beer daily to train yourself and be in the form, you are an ascetic.
As well, as the neighbor’s girl that every day rushes violin scales behind your apartment wall.

Damn her asceticism with all that f-f.. flats and sharps!

That is, an ascetical ascetic, preparing themselves for future life in heaven, is just a special case among the other ascetics.

Asceticisms are short and long, depending on the purpose…) 

And what—if I may ask—were the goals that made me so rigorously guard my being thin as a rake and every weekday write out unfamiliar words from the newspaper ‘Morning Star'? 
As I already tried to explain, there is a certain vagueness about the details of general plans. 
I just feel that it’s necessary and therefore I do so.

The extracts from the ‘Morning Star’ required keen attention and self-checking.
When meeting an incomprehensible word about which I absolutely knew that it had been already come across in the newspaper, it was tempting to omit it, after all, it remained exactly the same! 
But what does it mean?

It's too tedious to rummage through the pile of written copybooks, much easier to look it up again in Chamber's Dictionary and once again write out what it meant. 
Therefore at times, I was looking up a word whose page number I could say by heart, but not its meaning. 
Some memory, eh?
That’s what asceticism does to a person.
You repeat actions without really knowing why you have to...

For me, the incident of that evening did not become a temptation, I only was amazed.
And she, for her part, was not seducing me but rather tried to claim fulfillment of parental duty.

I was grossly indebted to Lenochka.
I never took her in my arms, nor kept her in my lap, nor stroke her hair.
We just lived in the same hutta, where she had once been told that I was her dad but, in fact, what kind of father was I?
Just some dry formula, an abstract symbol.
A contactless dad.

Of course, I never pushed her away, at times I could even get carried away by talking to her, but for a child that, probably, is not enough.
And for me, as a father, that surely is not enough but so turned out my relationship with each and every one of my five children... 

When Lenochka was born, I just was not ripe yet for the role of father.
Dad at eighteen? Don’t make me laugh!
Then followed the years at the construction battalion and the institute.

When you were born, I was already fit to be a father, and I loved you selflessly, but not for too long – my reputation separated us. 

I met Ruzanna in her six years.
She called me ‘daddy’ all along and I loved her as my daughter, but I hugged her for the first time at her departing to Greece to her husband Apostolos.
Again the same contactlessness.

I could not embrace and caress Ashot and Emma, born after him because Ruzanna was around and she had not got anything of the kind from me. 
That would be unjust.
So, the father of five children, I still remained just a formal dad.
Poor kids!
Yet it's unfair to be sorry for them only because I also lived a life deprived of kids' affection...

Now let’s return to how Lenochka tried to correct such a glaringly wrong state.

She entered the room and sat on my lap, separating me from the desk with the dictionary, a copybook and ‘Morning Star'.
Looking up at me, she raised her hand and pressed the small palm to my cheek.

Probably, she tried to teach me how to do it.

(...what pushed me away?
Fear of falling to incest?
Not a chance, with my robotic self-control.
Most likely, the smile on her face saying ‘Oh, you poor thing!’ had put my back up..)

‘Well, enough, Lenochka, I have to work.’

The smile gave way to an angry expression and she started to vengefully jump, sitting on my lap.

‘What? Dreams of sweetmeats? Ain’t it too early?’

And I rose to my feet like a soulless robot, leaving her without the pad for bouncing...

Several days later, on return from work, I noticed a change on the bookshelves. 
There appeared a black hole.
The high cheekbone of Eera’s face, on the amateur photo in the middle of the stream, was punched through.

The tool of that vandalism, and maybe even Voodooism, served a sharp pencil, or, possibly, a ballpoint pen.
I did not dwell on the question: who?
What’s the difference?

‘Lenochka, come here!’
‘What?’
‘As a father, I have to take care of your education, so that you understand what is what.
Now, look at the photo on the shelf.' 
‘What?’
‘This is called baseness.’
‘It’s not me.’
‘I am not saying it’s you. Just remember what ‘baseness’ is. And it does not matter who does it.’

The photo had to be taken to the photo studio opposite the Loony.
Their employee Arthur, a young Armenian specializing in the transfer of photo portraits to ceramics, said the hole was fixable. 
Only I asked to enlarge the picture to the size of a wall portrait, leaving everything as it was, and the stream too.

For the restored and enlarged photo, I also bought a cardboard frame and put it back on the shelf.
Seeing the result, my mother gave a derisive jeer and that was the only comment.
I did not start any pedagogical conversations on the topic, and the photo remained completely immune to malicious attempts and stood there slowly collecting dust... 

On the eve of the second anniversary of her son Andrew, my sister Natasha complained of impossibility to find a railway model even for the ready money.
Did I remember the huge circle of tiny rails with a miniature train running along at the Object?
I had vague childhood memories of the beautiful toy and picked her complaint as an excuse to break out of everyday Konotop life. 
I was a loving uncle, after all!

For a start, I went to Kiev...

The saleswoman of the specialized department store ‘Kids' World' sat glumly behind the counter in a black padded jacket of workmen over her blue coat of the specialized store uniform. 
She got a bit more cheerful when I told her I was looking for a choo-choo.
She chuckled and answered in a villagers parlance so that the yokel of me would understand:
‘Ain’t a-having any choo-choos.’
It did not surprise me because what Natasha said would always be so.

The next detail coming to the plan became the capital of our Homeland – Moscow.
It was where were stretching the caravan trails to for those exasperated with empty store shelves in the deficit semi-deserts.

In the metropolitan ‘Kids' World,' there were choo-choos with cars, and rails and bridges so that the train could run over, powered by a small battery. 
I took the prey to the railway station, stored it in an automatic storage cell and returned to the downtown to snatch my share of the cultural life.

At the ticket office of the Bolshoi Theater, I was told that the tickets should be reserved two weeks beforehand. 
A little disappointed, I left the glorious hotbed of culture discriminating against flotsam loving uncles.

On the sidewalk outside, there was a glass cubic booth entirely curtained from inside with all sorts of show bills selling tickets to the theaters and concert halls of the Moscow city. 
For the coming evening, they offered to choose either the concert of leading pop stars in the Kremlin Hall or a concert of a jazz band at the Central Theater of the Soviet Army. 
So I could visit the Kremlin for the stale garbage they poured on TV, or…
‘Jazz, of course!’

(...they say that the railway station of Chernigov was built under the Germans, during the occupation.
And I trust those sayers.
Why?
Well, at least for the fact, that they are not paid for that, unlike many compilers of countless Soviet history books.

And they say also, the bird-eye view of the Chernigov station presents a Teutonic cross.
I had never considered the building in question from above, yet I can testify that from all the stations visited by me, only there any time of the day you could have ready boiling water from a big copper tap…) 

And all that reminds me, that the building of the Central Theater of the Soviet Army looked like a five-pointed star.
From above.
So hearsay had it...

Inside it was a massive interior with a large hall on the first floor and exhibition stands in the wide galleries on the second.

I scrupulously examined the exhibition of envelopes and matchbox stickers issued during the Great Patriotic War, because I arrived there two hours before the concert.
And what else could I do in the unfamiliar winter Moscow?
The pictures on the envelopes and stickers, with all their naive primitiveness, turned out to be nostalgically appealing because I grew up on black and white movies of that period. 

Then I went down to the hall, where the jazzmen soon began to install and check their instruments on stage – the drummer kit, the vibraphone, the speakers.
Having finished these preparations, the musicians attacked the bold Jewish man for coming so too late.
He drove a fool to them about hardships of Moscow life and then went on a counterattack to the tune that he soon would give up all that music altogether and let anyone give him a good reason why he needed it at all.

They left the stage and the hall began to slowly fill up.
For the audience of about two hundred the soft chairs in the hall were more than enough.
And the concert started.

The announcer was a tall fat girl who also sang at times.
I absorbed one number after another and wanted only one thing – let don’t them end.
What Dixieland the vibraphone sounded! 
And what a bass guitar!
Once the guitarist was left alone with the girl and his bass guitar and they, just three of them, performed such a blues on the empty stage!. 
The Jew came out only once, he played a tom-tom.
Played?!
The whole Africa would not be able to give out such a number on drums.
I forgave him his bald head and dumb talk before the concert because he turned into a completely different person. 
He forgot that he did not need it and created rhythms filled with thrill. 
‘Bravo!’...

Apparently, in the Central Theater of the Soviet Army, aka TTSA, parallel to the concert had been held another event because to the barrier in the locker room there also crowed officers in uniform who were not in the hall.
The cloakroom attendant girl brought two clothes at once and put them on the counter.
A generals’ overcoat with a red silk lining and the karakul collar (so this withered mushroom on my right is a general?) and the camel demi-season from Alyosha Ocheret.
She laid them down and gave a sigh to them. 

(...and what are we to do?
The usual dilemma of life – either a hussar in his prime, but without a kopeck in his pocket, or a tattered ruin of a general with a secured income.
Everyone has levers to please the ladies in sighing mood, that's only those levers are located in different spheres…) 

Moscow taxi drivers were more professional than their Kiev counterparts.
Anyway, the one who picked me up after the concert, having estimated my look and lack of hand luggage, guessed to take me to a hotel where they did not start the fiddle-fart talk of reservations. 

The hotel ‘Polar’ was starting from the sidewalk and getting lost somewhere up there in the darkness.
The receptionist sent me by elevator to unimaginable heights between the twelfth and sixteenth floors. 
The room was similar to the doss room at Ukrainian stations where you could spend the night having the passport and one ruble for a bed.
It's just that in the ‘Polar' room the beds were more, about twenty pieces, and the guests in their sportswear were already laying on them. 

At that moment, my stomach reminded me that I had forgotten to dine after the cultural life, as well as during my hunt for the train model.
I asked where a dining room or buffet was and the relaxing sportsmen, with some kind of gloating, explained that anything of the sort was closed at seven.

I felt more and more hungry, and there was also an urge to punish my neighbors happy to break the unwelcome news, so I take off my camel coat and drove back down by the elevator.
On the low wide porch outside, next to the hotel entrance, there also was a tall door to the restaurant.
It was, naturally, locked but inside you could see lights and some kind of motion.

I started to pound onto the brown frame of the door glasses.
A man in a cap and yellow strips on his jacket appeared on the other side.
At the sight of me in a jacket open on the white shirt, against the black ink background of the late evening and the tiny sparkles of downing flakes, he had no other options but to deduct my being a guest who had got out from the restaurant to powder my nose or something in the open air.
He unlocked the door and I rushed into the hall.

The restaurant occupied a considerable area, it was housing the festivities of two weddings at once and there still were vacant tables.
I had to wait a long time, but at last a waiter approached me to whom I explained my wish to have a plain meal without excesses.

To pass the time until he brings my Spartan order, I watched the dance of the newlywed from the wedding closer to me.
At the end of their dance, the burly bride got bugged and dealt a mean elbow punch into the chest of the skinny groom. 
Clutching his tie, he cringed his face in a pain-hiding smile, where a few teeth were missing. 
The foundation of marital relations was being laid as early as the wedding party.
Oh, boy! You’ve really stepped into...
Sorry, that was a wrong card…
Aha! Here it is!
"May the love and happiness you feel today shine through the years."

Paying for the meal I was one ruble short.
Actually, I had a ruble, but I wanted to keep it for the next day's expenses. 
I asked the waiter's name to make up the shortfall later.
He gave his name and did not insist on getting the ruble immediately.
I got back to the room up there contentedly well-fed and to the questions of the curious guests casually informed that the restaurant below was still working...

In the evening of next day, I arrived in Konotop and proudly brought the gift for my nephew to the At-Seven-Winds.
Natasha’s family already lived there in the nine-story block constructed by the PMK-7.
The trip by the elevator to the fourth floor seemed provincially short, but their door was not opened to me.

Guena sometimes left for sessions at his correspondence technical school in the Donbass, and Natasha might have been visiting some of her block neighbors. 
I did not know a single one of them, although, in the form of helping the young family, I wrote all the test works on philosophy and history for Guena. 
From the black sheep of a lousy brother-in-law, you still can sometimes get a fluff of wool. 

On my way to 13 Decemberists, I turned in one of the dead-ends of the Pirogov street, where Guena's parents' hutta was located. 
His father was asleep already and Natalya Savelyevna sat in the living room with Andrey – her grandson, aka my nephew.
I wanted to leave the box and go, but she asked me to assemble the toy railway, Andrey was still awake anyway.

When the train model, with low buzzing, started to run around the floor in the living room, I was not an uncle anymore, Andrey and I became equal in age...

The restoration of the translations lost in the fit of drunken akinesia on a local train took about a year.
Because they still were fresh in memory I was not able to stretch the pleasure longer.
With the final period in the last of the translations, I took the four-volume edition of stories by Maugham to Nezhin, to return them to Nona.

Nearing the teachers’ block in the Count’s Park, I caught up with Nona and Lidya Panova, who was my group’s curator in the years of my study at the English Department of the NGPI.
They were heading to the entrance to the staircase in their section, but, noticing me, stopped.
I greeted both of them and informed Nona how impossible it was to convey with mere words all the gratitude I felt for the four-volume originals borrowed from her and now brought back, here you are.
She smiled from under her glasses and reached out for the plastic bag.

I intercepted her hand, like, for a democratic handshake in style of characters by Jack London.
But then, unexpectedly even for myself, I bent and kisses the back of her hand.
Only after that, the bag was passed. 
Straightening up, I gave Panova a stiff nod and left.
Well, at least I hadn’t clicked the shoe heels like hussar Lieutenant Rzhevsky, the hero of f-f.. folklore.

My euphoria got off the local train at the first stop and anxious thoughts became my fellow travelers...

What a blessing, after all, is the inability to make up detailed plans! 
Them those plans should be kept as short as possible.
Prepare a collection of translated short stories to be printed in 150 000 copies.
Period.
When thinking the plan over in minor details, you expose it to a deadly risk.
There inevitably will pop up some insurmountable details to send your plan to rest like the Titanic was by its iceberg.
Look out! What the f……!!!!!
And peaceful becalmed bubbling.
And why to bother to start doing the impossible…

Which normal publishing house will ever undertake considering the scribbles of my handwriting? 
Is there a way to transform them into typewritten text?
Learning to type myself?
A yummy plan!
Know a place where they sell typewriters?
And another iceberg penetrates the hold…

The secretary of Manager of the SMP-615 had a juggernaut of ‘Yatran’ typewriter on her desk.
Sort of a shop floor machine with a black cord to feed it with 220  voltage. 
You simply touched a key and it responded with series of uncontrollable bursts, like a Kalashnikov assault rifle, nothing like the seductive cluck-cluck-cluck of typewriters in the movies.
Besides, the secretary did not know Ukrainian and even Russian texts typed with one finger.

Well, suppose, after work, I would come to the office and little by little…
Yes, this one too went straight to the sea bottom because of the SMP-615 new boss’s beings so jealous.
He viewed the SMP-615 administrative building as his personal chicken coop, and would not tolerate any bricklayer horsing around even after work.
The icebergs of unforeseen details threatened the plan from all directions and brought the navigation to a halt...

We worked in the locomotive depot at the construction site of the three-story administrative building, when Natasha, seeing me on a tram shared, by the by, that Eera was going to get married in Nezhin.
To doubt the words of my sister was useless, they just always had to be taken for granted.
The news in passing somehow crushed me for more than a day.
Yet, I recovered, thanks to our foreman Mykola Khizhnyak’s suggestion that I dismantle the trestles along the finished partition on the second floor...

When the laid partition height reaches 1.2 meters, you have to install the cradles by it, bridge them with planks and from that trestle continue laying brick up to the ceiling.
The cradles brought from the SMP-615 base were too few for all the bricklayers and we were substituting ‘ratsukha’ for them (that is how our team streamlined the word ‘rationalization).

‘Ratsukha’ was a pair of pallets stitched with nails together to work instead of cradles.
Because the pallets were shorter than needed, on top of the first deck we added further ratsukhas to be bridged in their turn.
The whole contraption looked like a house of cards, was more flimsy and shaky than legitimate trestles, but it worked.
The trickiest moment came with dismantling ‘ratsukha’ trestle.
Some of the decking boards were nailed to the pallets, other not, and they all were high above your head and, when you started to knock them off and down to the floor, the scattered fragments of brick and layers of dried mortar stuck to the boards up there were pouring down as well.
Few people on our team liked dismantling trestles.
And for me, it was, sort of, a chess etude. 
Only the falling fragments should be dodged in time.

Yet for that particular dismantling, I sent all chess to hell. 
Furious, like a berserk Viking running to battle in just a cloth shirt, with a long iron breaker I pulled the boards from the nails screeching and squealing in protest.
I threw off the top deck and, swinging and raging over the mess of boards under my feet, kept slashing the cradles of the stitched pallets with sweeping blows of the same breaker while roaring like a wounded beast:
‘A wedding?! Here’s a wedding for you!’
My nostrils rounded and sprawled in the frenzied rage and pumped the dry dust, whipped up with crushingly collapsing trestles, in and out. 

It’s good, at least sometimes, to let yourself go.
Not everyone though is vouchsafed the pleasure.

Me neither, for even while raging and carried away with the pleasure of having all the restricting tethers cut I still was fully aware that I was only aping the actions of Odysseus from a recent movie adaptation of his wanderings.
He similarly pulled his lips over the clenched teeth when coming back home he started to knock off, one by one, the suitors of his wife Penelope.
And about the wedding which ‘here’s for you!’ that also was a quotation from the same film.

Anyway, just in a few minutes in place of the trestle, there was a heap of boards interspersed with torn pallets. 
The room was filled with a thick cloud of dust and, in the corridor, the foreman’s wife, rigger Katerina, hiding by the doorway, listened intently – what wedding was I about?.

My sister Natasha never reported about Eera’s new marriage.
It seems that time Odysseus and I did what we wanted.
Yet, in afterthought, what right did we have to impede the natural and normal current of events in the life of an unfamiliar woman whose only guilt was in the coincidence of names with my Eera and her dwelling where she once lived?
Just another folly of mine.

(...so it turned out that I was neither a wolf nor a hooey-pricker, but an ordinary dog in the manger.
Like those kings that sent their divorced wives under the home arrest in a monastery.
Although, if the monastery has a proper gardener with a good lever, as depicted by Boccaccio…
Again, I am being carried away with making rational plans for royals as if I don’t have problems of my own…)

But it was Natasha who found for me the solution to the titanically insurmountable problem of turning the manuscripts into typewritten text.
She said there was a typing pool on the street connecting the Square of Konotop Divisions and the Sennoy Market.
Possibly, someone there would agree to type my translations... 

The two-story house of the typing pool looked like the Cherevko’s school.
From the entrance, a straight flight of wooden stairs led on the second floor where, in two adjacent rooms, a dozen of typists with amazing speed were chirping their typewriters. 

One of them, named Valya, in a short blond haircut, agreed to type the shortest from the short stories from the thin copybook which I brought with me for a test.
She appointed a day for me to come for the finished text.
Taming my heart beat, I said I had more translations.
She replied I could bring them too, by one or two at a time.
I asked her about the payment, but she waved the question away... 

Two, maybe three months I was visiting the typing pool on the days said by Valya.
I approached the house from the opposite sidewalk, in the best traditions of underground conspirators and secret agents.
Diving in the wide open door of the entrance I cautiously crept to the second floor – just only not to shoo off the crazy luck.

Passing to Valya the copybook with the last of the stories, I again tried to find out about the payment, and she again dismissively shook her head.
Labor must be rewarded, so I decided to pay anyway, if not with money, then in kind.

Near the tram stop by the Peace Square, on the first floor of the five-story block, stretched a line of shops hanging over the sidewalk with their slightly drooping shop windows. 
The last in their row was ‘The Flowers’ on the right, and the first, close to the square corner, ‘The Jewelry’.
There, after several circles around the glass box-cabinets with exorbitantly expensive necklaces, bracelets, and gold rings, I bought a silver chain for 25 rubles. 
As a case for it, a round lacquered powder box with ornament was purchased for 5 rubles plus.
However, that was from ‘The Souvenirs’ department in the Department Store.

Collecting the typewritten pages of the last story, I gave Valya the powder box and asked to look under the lid.
She picked up from it a long thin chain of white metal.
‘Melchior?’ asked her the typist from the next desk.
I did not explain anything to anyone: whoever wanted would find a way to check what was of what.
That month, the alimony to Nezhin and Konotop again nosedived to 15 rubles each...

A couple of days before the May Day I again felt like giving in to rituals.

From 13 Decemberists, I brought a piece of a bright red cloth, 40×40 cm, to the site in the locomotive depot.
I nailed it to a two-meter beam from the pile of remnants of former trestles, and it turned out to be a cheerful flag.
So that it was not in the way with the work of our team, I fixed it on the finished corner of the third-floor walls and there it splashed happily in the spring wind, above the river of railway tracks streaming towards the station. 

Peter Kyrpa asked me if I was again for it and I drove him a fool about the day of international solidarity of the working class people.
He promised me that soon they would come after me, but our team did not support him.
Laying the courses of brick in the wall, we sometimes looked back at the ripples in the flaunting red above our stooped working class backs. 

On the morning of May Day, in jeans and a T-shirt, I went out to the veranda to put on my shoes.
My parents also were there.
For many years already they consider themselves not obliged to go out for the demonstration.
I sat down on a small stool made by golden hands of my father to tie the strings of my black leather shoes.

‘You’re not going anywhere,’ my mother said and stood between me and the glazed veranda door.
‘You’ll stay home.’ confirmed my father and bolted the door with latch produced by him at the RepBase.
The happening looked like a home arrest without trial and investigation.
Still sitting, I ducked my head and in a low voice started a plaintive song:

‘Oh, Dnipro, Dnipro,
You’re a mighty stream,
With the clouds afloat above you...’

I did not know any more word from that song, so I got up and took a step towards the door.
My father seized my neck with the grip of his working-class arms of a hammerer, diesel engine tamer, and skillful locksmith. 
I always admired the bumps of his biceps.
My mother hung on my opposite shoulder.
Dragging their total weight, I continued slow progress towards the door.
There I pulled the latch aside, wriggled out of the suffocating grasp of the two opponents and jumped off the porch onto the brick path to the gate.
‘Bastard!’ shouted my father.
‘Scoundrel!’ backed him up my mother.
With a victorious sneer I exclaimed:
‘Ca-up, Mom!’

(...in our family tradition, at the age of two I pronounced ‘catch up!’ that way…)

Since then I stopped speaking to my parents and I dropped participating in the May and November demonstrations.
Instead, on reaching the Professions street, I turned left and walked to the very outskirts, where the huttas were replaced with meadows and the trees of the forest belt along the railroad embankment.
From there a deserted dirt road led me to the station of Kukolka.
I did not go to the station though but after a couple of kilometers followed the solitary track branching from the main railway. 
It was not used by trains, it was a reserve track in case of war.
Such case would make Konotop a target for bombardment, as a strategically important junction, and the reserve track detoured the would-be-destroyed city.

Along with that track over empty fields, I reached the forest by the Seim river. 
To the Seim itself I went out not far from the local train stop ‘Pryseymovye’ and walked to the place on its bank where once, still unmarried, I spent a day with Eera.
In that spot, I read an issue of ‘Morning Star', almost completely, bypassing the last sports page which I always ignored anyway. 
The newspaper I left in the grass on the bank, maybe would come in handy for someone.

The return journey ran along the main two-track embankment.
I entered Konotop together with it and for a long time continued walking along the gardens, right up to the second bridge, where the embankment turned to the railway station. 
There we parted and I went on, by the outskirts, along with the Swamp. 
Already in the evening darkness, I crossed the Bogdan Khmelnitsky street behind the old cemetery and through the Sosnovska street reached the terminal of tram 3, from where to 13 Decemberists there remained hop, skip and a jump.

On the whole, it was like whirling in a wide vicious circle with a return to the starting point after walking all day. 
The music from the demonstrations loudspeakers was substituted with self-made marching chants, like:

‘So what about
are we laughing
while our shoes
 this trail is roughing?’

But all that was in the future, and for the very first time, I did not have ‘Morning Star', instead of which there was a pinprick feeling in my chest on the left. 
And it did not want to disappear no matter how often I scratched the T-shirt in that area.
Even at night the unpleasantness persistently stayed by me, so in the morning I decided to have a session of labor therapy.

I went to the locomotive depot, penetrated its deserted and quietude spelled grounds, because of the second holiday day, and went to the construction site of the administrative building.
At the hillock of white silicate bricks brought by dump trucks, I planted an empty pallet and started to stack bricks on it.
At times it was necessary to press my chest with the left elbow because the pin there got replaced with a thick knitting needle. 

When all the twelve rows of bricks were stacked up on the pallet, I told myself that my case was not terminal and climbed to the incomplete third floor.
There I took the Jolly Roger from the corner of the building, slipped it into a hole in the slabs and buried with a dried mortar and other debris.

Kyrpa’s threats remained just empty words, that summer I was never taken to Romny.
Might it be I had grown wiser? 
I doubt it.
It’s just because I had not run into a sore spot of some high-ranking bitch.

By the middle of May, the needle, or pin, or whatever it was to pierce my chest, gradually dissolved and many years later I realized that it had been the first of heart attacks I experienced...

In my rough plan cropped up another, but the pleasant detail, that of assembling the typewritten pages into one complete volume of stories. 
For that purpose, I bought a folder from the Department Store, with a hard plastic cover and nickel-plated rings inside. 
In folders of that sort, they usually keep yearly general accounting reports and stack them on the shelves in series of the like folders. 
Sturdy, respect inspiring things.
To punch the holes for the rings in the pages of the text, I borrowed the puncher of the secretary in the SMP-615 administrative building.
The new boss grew green when saw me in his poultry farm, however, his sore spots could not be yet considered high-ranking enough.

The folder with the collection of translated short stories was holstered into a pretty looking plastic bag and I took it—bugle your trumpets, fanfarade! Roll, timpani, roll!—in the capital city of Kiev, to the book publishing house ‘Dnipro’.

In the first room, where I proudly proclaimed that—here! here!—I had a collection of translations of short stories by William Somerset Maugham, the jovial young man informed that he was not the person in charge of Maugham and the expert I needed was to be found two offices further down the corridor.
If would I like him to have me seen over there?
With dignified gratitude, I declined.

At the indicated office there sat a fat, but also young man staring with disgust at a skinny pile of typewritten pages inside an open file of purple cardboard spreading its short white strings upon his desk.
He reluctantly opened the heavy hard-plastic-armored file that I handed him over his desk and glanced at the title of the first story in the collection.
‘The Rain.’
He shut the file and asked who I was sent by.

In confused bewilderment, my mind revved to its limits.
Forbidden to come here on your own accord?
Too high circles.
I should have been sent by the duke*** for the courtier-receptionist to guess whose vassal I was.
He would compare the duke’s weight to that of his suzerain—marquis***—to know how to handle me.
And then one phone call to verify, just in case, and he would know which drawer to safely stick it in. 
And cherish no hope, under this polished system, to find a hole for the f-f.. freelancer-outsider.

He, just in case, opened the volume once again, someplace in the middle, and immediately slammed it shut.

‘I'm just an errand-boy,' answered I. ‘They asked me to take it to your publishing house, so I brought it here.' 
‘Who?’
I opened the file to show the sticker on inside of its back cover with my Konotop address. 
‘This friend of mine.’ said I.

It was below his position to talk to a messenger who was not sent by even a petty baron but from nondescript Konotop or something like that. 
I coldly replied to his official goodbye and left.

The next evening, in Konotop, coming from work, I saw on my shelves a weighty postal package wrapped in their mustard-brown paper.

 I had no reason to open the parcel.
What for?
By its size and familiar weight, I knew what was inside. 
The annual report for the past six years of my life comprising 472 typewritten pages of 35 short stories by Maugham translated into Ukrainian.
It’s strange the parcel post hadn’t reached Konotop before I came back from Kiev.
And it was also strange that the unopened package with unread stories left me so frostbitten indifferent. 

(...as it turned out, those six years did not fit into the feudally regulated grid of book publishing system.

‘Who has sent you to our rectangularly ordered reality?’
‘Sorry, I’ve knocked on a wrong door.’

“Farewell, dear peers and peerixes, sirs and sirixes!”
As my Uncle Vadya used to say, and he was a great connoisseur of vassal dependencies from the school textbook of the Middle Ages History...)



