~~~ The Parade of Planets ~~~

On the day D, aka my departure, everything was by a hairbreadth from the fall, more precisely, by the breadth of a cobweb thread.
I noticed that when I went out to the entrance vestibule to spark.
In the apartment, I did not smoke at all.
That cobweb thread hanging from the upper crossbar of the cracked entrance door frame was tightly strung with the weight of burned match dangling from its end.
How long would it last?

It was I who always stuffed burned matches in the gap above the frame because there was not a trash bin in the entrance vestibule.
After Tonya’s toddler son exposed my connection with hemp I did not care what the passers-by would scent in my smoke floating in the vestibule.
Would the cobweb thread hold on until I was away?

I looked out of the vestibule shade into the yard.
In the heat-melted sky, a squadron of black ravens coasted lowly.
They did not move their wings—too hot for the effort—heading to the northeast, even the feathers at their wing-tips held apart so as to catch the hot breeze.
Would I get through?.

Eera saw me to the train to Kiev.
When we were getting on a bus, Alla Pugacheva sobbed from a balcony in the neighboring five-story block her latest hit after me:

‘Please, come back for at least a day!..’

I did not have much luggage – a briefcase with a book of stories by W. S. Maugham in English (soft pink cover, Moscow publishing house ‘The Enlightment’), the Hornby’s Learners’ Dictionary, a 12-leaf copy-book with a stub of translation of ‘The Rain’ story by Maugham (4 pages of a rough pencil draft with multiple corrections), the employment history book (the first entry made on September 13, 1971, at Konotop Locomotive and Car Repair Plant), the passport, the military ID, and shaving accessories.
And also a blue sports bag with a shoulder strap containing a change of underpants, a pair of shirts, jeans, and the geologist jacket sewn by my mother of green tarpaulin.

In the local train, I threw them onto the car-long rack of thin tubes above the windows and went back to the platform.
Eera was nervous that the doors would slam shut and the train leave without me.
I climbed one step to the car vestibule and stood there, grabbing the nickel-plated vertical railing.
‘I left something on the windowsill, let it be there till I’m back.’
‘What’s that?’
‘You’ll see. I’ll be back exactly in a month.’
‘When there, call at once!’
It was the last car of the train.

An old woman ran up along the platform.
She asked about something but I neither listened nor wanted to, I was looking at Eera until the speakers in the car shouted ‘Beware! The doors are closing!’
And they cut me off her.
The electric train pulled and, gaining the speed, rumbled along the rails in the direction of Kiev...

The night before, I went out shopping together with Eera.
The department store had been locked already, but a glassed stall by its side was still open.
From the middle-aged gypsy woman inside of it, I bought a new manual razor machine, a shaving brush, a standup mirror, and two handkerchiefs.
Each of them had a series of thin blue wavy lines printed on the field with a thin circular frame in the center.
They were different only by the pictures inside those frames – a small sailing boat in one, a neat blue anchor in the other.

In my pocket I was carrying away the handkerchief with the sailing boat, the one with the anchor was left on the windowsill.
Coming back, I would put their circles to each other, the boat to the anchor.
It would be the ritual of return.

And late at night Gaina Mikhailovna suddenly grew anxious and started to tell there was no need to go anywhere and it was still possible to return the ticket Kiev-Odessa to the preliminary ticket office.
I thought I was going to get mad – what ticket return, on earth?

Eera and Tonya also joined the conversation, only the father-in-law was out, urgently called to the Bakery Plant.
Staring at the table oilcloth, the mother-in-law was mumbling about the too difficult situation, so that even Ivan couldn’t get through.

A week before, Ivan, Tonya’s husband left for Transcarpathia, but a day later, without ever reaching there, he returned from Kiev—I couldn’t get it why—and was presently sitting in the other bedroom with their children.

By that time, I had already realized, that the world was in the state of constant wrangling, the unceasing battle went on – but who against who?
And, naturally, all that was hidden under the surface layer of the common everyday life.
However, I was already capable of catching glimpses of certain inconsistencies, secret signs, the instances of people letting out things surpassing limits of the customary life.
Was I sure they were exactly people?
Well, I did not have another name for them.

Letting out? What namely? What about?
About things that did not belong to the life we were accustomed to.
… Ivan was repealed on his emissary mission… unable to get through… and whose side are you on?.. the fire at the Bakery Plant, an episode in the universal battle… 
Who’s for who? Who’s against who?.

A thunderstorm broke behind the black window in the living room.
The ramble of falling water cut through with the thunderclaps. 
The flicker of lightning flashes.
A pillar of blinding light struck the transformer box in the yard.
The darkness reigned around.

Tonya went to her bedroom to calm the children and Ivan down.
She came back with a burning candle.

In its feeble light, I saw that I was talking to Mothers. 
Those very Mothers so cautiously and in the cut-and-run manner mentioned by Goethe.
Three Mothers they were: the old, but powerful, the middle, and the beginner – Eera.
She was not my ally, she was one of them.
I needed to persuade them, otherwise, nothing would come out. 

With the storm raging outside the reflection of a blinking candle in the black glasses, I still managed to get their go-ahead.
In conclusion, the eldest said: 
‘If something would go awry… in a hopelessly extreme situation… turn to the very Head.' 

At night I saw a prophecy dream.
In the room with the half-translucent pale gray walls, I lay on a gurney, trying to hide from the cold fluorescent light flooding through everything.
A group of someones in white robes gathered around me.
The one standing behind my head said:
‘If not for the fat, it still might come out...’  

I knew that the one in the white who pronounced that was also me.
Throwing a furtive glance from under my half-closed eye-lid on my stomach upon the gurney, through the translucence of the skin I saw a thin yellowish layer, maybe the fat he was talking about…

I went out into the car vestibule and sparked.
In the sky behind the dusty glass of the automatic doors, a flock of seahorses floated with their tails rounded up under the bellies. 
Lined by their height, from the bigger to the smaller.
They were also fond of a system, like those white elephants.
The train hurriedly ran ahead but couldn’t escape from them…

A man entered the vestibule with a row of medals on his jacket.
A war veteran.
Here’s the one who once knew who’s for who, who’s against who.
We shot the breeze for a while.

At one of the stops, a man with a bundle of long thin planks stepped in from the platform. 
He carried his load between us and went on into the car.
The veteran, with a fright, popped up in his eyes, looked into the upper corner behind me.
I knew that there was nothing there, but since he saw it then there it was.
And I also went to the car under the rack carrying my things because Kiev was approaching our train... 

At the station, I took things to the cool and spacey underground checkroom hall. 
On coming back up to the surface of the square in front of the station, I found the passage in its right corner leading to the steep and long stair flights to the canteen once shown to me and Olga by Lekha Kuzko. 
At the bottom of the stairs, I sparked and went on, but had to stop smoking when a platoon of militiamen poured out of the canteen and marched towards me along the sidewalk. 
So I had to walk through their formation with a lit joint in my hand.

From the canteen, I returned to the station and took a walk-round. 
There were not so many glass-eyed as at the night round in the Nezhin station, probably, because of another time of the day.
Still, there were some and at my approach, they hurriedly pretended that they were there just so, as ordinary passengers. 

I went up to the third floor where there was the mother-and-child room and explained to the watchwoman that in a month I would be passing their station with my wife and baby-daughter and now dropped in to see the conditions.
Well, in general, rather a clean corridor, thank you. 

Near the toilet rooms on the first floor, a young militiaman with a black eye of deep purple color took pains to avoid any eye contact with me, although both of us knew that his black eye was a result of my walking through their formation and that he, who had suffered in the universal battle would not forgive me it.

Then I stood for a long stretch of time in the waiting hall on the second floor in front of the huge news stall desk with piles of various newspapers, magazines, postal envelopes.
But all that time I looked at just one postcard.
There was the bluest blue sky in its picture.
I had to wait a long time until there sounded footsteps behind me hardly audible in the joint buzz of the crowd in the hall.
I did not look back.
The footsteps stopped.
A copper coin the size of an eye iris fell on the blue of that postcard.
Only then I turned and went away without looking back – from that moment on no casual genes would be able to change the color of your eyes.

And only then it was that the station loudspeakers voice broke through to me:
‘The train Kiev-Odessa departs from the third platform.  We ask escorting citizens to leave the cars.’

...At those times even the bravest minds in the most rampant flights of their fantasies could not imagine or think about an installation of surveillance cameras in public places. 

Then what, under those times' conditions, could have been the reason for the incomprehensible scene that happened the same evening in the queue of passengers waiting at the bus-stop in front of the Kiev intercity bus station? 
There can be just one possible answer – the vigilance of a taxi driver.

(...here the word ‘reason’ is used in the customary meaning of this term at describing details of the surrounding reality by means of substitution it for traditionally kept and orthodoxly agreed upon cause-effect relationships.
However, I at that period was too muchly absorbed in tracing up the interrupted chain of transcendental symbols and signs of varying significance, being constantly discovered by me, in order to reach a new and higher level of understanding of the world and my role in it…)

So, back to the taxi driver in the parking lot by the steps to the underground checkroom hall at the Kiev railway station for trains of the long-distance destination.

At 17.06 a young man about twenty-five-or-seven years old, one-meter seventy-eight centimeters tall, with straight brown hair, and a trimmed mustache, rose from the passage. 
He wore a gray jacket and gray pants that did not match the jacket’s shade.
Noticeably upset about something he got into the taxi and suggested that the driver should go down to the underground hall instead of him and bring a briefcase and a bag from the indicated automatic storage cell, the code to which he would name.
The driver, naturally, refused.

The dark-haired individual fell into a reverie, twisting a burnt match in his right-hand fingers, then sighed, broke the match in his hand, asked to wait a bit and disappeared down the passage steps. 
Five minutes later he appeared again and asked to take him to the intercity bus station.

Upon arrival at the specified place, he paid, hung the bag on his left shoulder, gripped the briefcase handle with the same hand and slammed the door.
Then he, like, imperceptibly rubbed nickel-plated door handle with the hem of his jacket destroying, by all the canons of criminal films, his fingerprints.
After these manipulations, he disappeared into the entrance to the intercity bus station.

What else could the driver naturally do?
Of course, he naturally called the operative he was secretly collaborating with under the pseudonym of ‘Tractor’.

What was witnessed by the queue of passengers at the bus stop to which I joined coming back from the bus station building after a visit to the men’s toilet and a five-minute stop in the lobby to consider the multi-meter picture ‘Fly with the Aeroflot!’ depicting a happily smiling stewardess in the uniform jacket?

Nearby the stop, a freshly washed Zhiguli car pulled up abruptly.
A man in dark sunglasses got out of it, came up to me and, holding out the ignition key on a bunch with other different ones, said: 
‘Get in the car, we’ll go right now.’
I silently turned away.
The man proceeded to the bus station building.

Soon two young men emerged from behind the right corner of the building—one of them in a militiaman uniform, the other in plainclothes—and took the position on the right side of the queue. 
From behind the left corner, the same man in dark glasses came together with a short companion in a thick fabric cap. 
They stopped on the other side of the queue.
The man in the cap (an obvious wretch and tipsy as well) mingled with the lining passengers and approached me.

He started rubbing against me from behind.
The nearby passengers looked in bewilderment.
The disgusting scene was interrupted by the appearance of a bus with the inscription ‘Polyot’ on its side.

On the way to Borispol, I did not respond to the puzzled looks of the fellow travelers, returning with my mental gaze to what had not been recorded with the then-non-existent and therefore absent surveillance camera in the men's toilet room of the Kiev intercity bus station. 

I went up to the sloping trough of the common urinal and poured there the mustard-brown powder of all the dope I had by me.
Then I crumpled its packing sheet of paper and threw it to the trash-bin.
The way I was taught by the French criminal movies starring Belmonde.

(…which is the evidence that I can be programmed not only by means of a text but with the application of movies too. 
In all my life that followed, up to this moment in the night forest by the river of Varanda, I stayed completely abstinent…) 

At the airport in Borispol, I didn't use an automatic cell to keep my bag and briefcase but left them in a baggage room so that they could make sure there was no point in rubbing their wretch provocateurs against my ass. 
A ticket to Odessa for a plane flying from Moscow cost 17 rubles.
It did not exceed the amount of 20 rubles I had by me for living until the first advance payment at the construction sites of the new port city...

On arrival at Odessa I couldn’t see the airport in the dark and went by bus to the intercity bus station where all the ticket offices were already locked but the baggage room still operated and in the waiting rooms there were benches for overnight sitting.

Sure enough, I felt myself a winner because of I managed, despite everything, to break through Kiev. 

The light-headed delight with the success was assuring me of my complete invulnerability.

Return to the real state of things was not very pleasant when a scattered line of passengers slogged to the back door for the first early morning bus. 
I was sitting half-asleep in the incipient daylight, my head thrown, with the defiant insolence of the winner, back over the bench backrest, leaving my whole throat completely undefended.

The pain from the needle sting to the right from Adam's apple made me pinch the skin in the carotid artery area. 
Of course, there was no needle there but the feeling of a deeply stuck, or rather hurriedly pulled out needle stayed there.
The following half hour I winced and rubbed my throat skin.

At the ticket office they said me there were no runs to Yuzhny and to get there I heeded a local communication bus from the bus station 3 by the New Bazaar.

Having reached there and in front of bus station 3 schedules where the line ‘Yuzhy' repeated itself at different hours, I decided that I should take a walk before departure because—damn you, OMG!—it was Odessa-Mommy! 
I was in Odessa!
Wow!.

At the end of the small station-hall stood just a couple sections of automatic storage cells.
All their doors were locked except for one in the upper row of a section.
I put my thing inside, dialed a code, dropped 15 kopecks into the slot and slammed the door.
The lock did not work, that’s why the cell had remained vacant.
I took the documents from my briefcase and put them in the inside pocket of my jacket.
Then I quietly closed the door so that it would look as if locked.

On the crest of the rolling up wave of euphoria, I left the bus station to Odessa...

Not everyone has the chance to experience the state of complete happiness in their life.
I am from among luckier ones.
More than that, I can indicate the time and place of the absolute happiness I have experienced.
These are the few hours of my first walk in Odessa...

The streets I walked along were filled with a joyful glare of the sun. 
I was a part of everything around and everything was a part of me in that unfamiliar city where everyone tacitly recognized me and had been so long awaiting my coming. 
I felt what people were thinking and gave them mental responses.

Here comes a woman rejoicing in her own beauty.
Wow! That's a really good one! 
And she blooms up victoriously.
But I have Eera.
And the woman gets sad and dropping her head walks past.

To a middle-aged Caucasian looking with a ho-hum stare around I threw in the thought:
‘Eew, Javad, I still remember your blow with a dagger!’
With all of his boredom shed off at once, he sorrowfully sagged the shoulders and pulled at his mustache, stunned by a sudden memory of a treacherous attack from Javad of whom up to the present moment he had not had the slightest idea. 
Okay, let’s not think sad things!

A fast-moving flock of pioneers in scarlet neckties and white shirts shoots past.
They hurry to the celebration of my arrival to the city.

I enter a big bookstore and make my choice for future.
I communicate with the shop-assistants and buyers without ever opening my mouth.

I walk up the steps of the famous stair past the monument to Richelieu who never was a cardinal.

In the nearby green grove there are again pioneers, but another squad, too much, to my mind, carried away with watching the freight cars with goods for the port.
‘Pioneers!' shout I to them. ‘Ships are far nicer than cars!' 
They looked around and smiled, they recognized me.

The taxi driver takes me to the Bratislava restaurant which is a canteen on weekdays.
But today is the holiday celebrating my arrival and he also knows that it is the long-awaited-for I.

After washing my hands and refreshing my face with water from the tap in the toilet, I go up to the top floor.
The waitress brings soup.
There is a crease in the tablecloth left with the hasty ironing.
I pass my palm over it and the crease disappears. 
Well, no wonder, after ironing the heaps of swaddles it’s easy to smooth creases out with a simple laying hands upon.

I start eating soup cooked by the recipes of the port city. 
I am alone in the whole hall.
On a nearby low podium there stood silent loudspeakers and amplifiers of a restaurant group.
So, what will I listen to?
Okay, let it be the Smokie.
I flick my fingers. 
Silence.
What?! I am not omnipotent?!
Or there is some other way to switch the music on?. 

And then I got overwhelming, as from an unexpected blow, sense of a gross mistake. 
Somewhere, there was a fatal flaw in calculations.
I was awfully wrong somewhere.
The soup was not eatable anymore. 
Its rice turned into finely crushed shells that settled on the plate bottom with the layer of tiny mother-of-pearl fragments.
Somewhere I was wrong.
I forgot something.
But what?!

I started to pace between the tables, to and fro. 
The waitress approached and I explained that I couldn’t eat, I forgot something.
‘What?’
‘My jacket in the toilet.’ said I the first thing that came to my mind.

At that very moment, the door of the hall opened and a neat pensioner announced that my jacket was in the cloakroom downstairs. 
I went down to the cloakroom barrier where a woman with the juicy Odessa accent gave me my jacket that the old man brought to her from the toilet.
‘And the pockets had been filled to the utmost.’ told she with the reproach clear to both of us.
I went upstairs to pay for the soup from mother-of-pearl...

It's like in the table game when you rise higher and higher along the winding path of figures and then swiftly flash down the pipe drawn to the very bottom line of them. 

I rolled out into the street from the restaurant ‘Bratislava’, where I had intentionally left my jacket in the toilet because there were documents and money in it at the moment when I entered and was accepted into a new shining world where money and documents were not needed.
On the way to the bus station, I noticed a long slit in my pants. 
On the thigh.
Starting from the right pocket.
And I went on covering it by my jacket with empty pockets, without the gifts from the new world which I couldn’t keep.
The unlocked cell at the bus station was also empty, without my things.

For the last ruble, I bought a ticket to Youzhny and squeezed it together with the kopecks of the change into the back pocket. 

The bus was jammed with passengers standing in the aisle.
My neighbor on the seat, silently sighing, rubbed the damned un-outable stain on the skirt. 
I knew she had got stained because of my fault. 
And my flaw caused the stuffed bus to stop at each and every traffic light angry red.

Then the bus stood for a long time on a trenched street giving way to an endless file of disgruntled pioneers covered with the dust from the earthen piles on the pavement.
It was me who spoiled the holiday.

By and by, the bus got outside the city, the passengers were leaving at the stops.
I also got out at the last but one, because it was wrong to come to Yuzhny with a hole as big as the wound in Spartacus' leg. 
On the outskirts of the settlement, I respectfully greeted a boy of about twelve and asked for a needle and thread. 

He got it at once and led me to a secluded place in a weed thicket behind the fence of large stone cubes with thick mortar seams. 
Then he went away and returned with his friend who had a needle and a long black thread.
The boys sat on the fence with their backs to me.
I took off my pants and started sewing up the burst seam.

From the other side of the stone wall came the sounds of the sharp screech of tires, of the clashes and roar of engines along the difficult roads in the endless universal battle. 
The boys sat as mere on-lookers having no idea that behind their backs a member of RMS darned a wound on his thigh.
With gratitude, I returned them the needle with the remaining thread... 

When alone, I took out a Belomor cigarette, lit it and drove the remainder of the burnt match into the ground.
How she howled up!
In a desperate heartbreaking low, that black and white cow at the nearby tree.
How could I know that everything was so entangled and connected!
