
Then I walked through a dense willow thicket and in the sky above there hung a huge bird, like a stork, almost motionless with an escort of smaller birds stuck around him...

So, that’s it – the highest Head.
Devil, or God or What else could you be is more than I get it. 
It's a too entangled and confused mingle-mangle of a whipped up world.
And here I am and having nothing but the documents, a pocket notebook, a pen and the handkerchief with a small sailing boat. 
Let’s sign the contract, it seems so is the rule, eh?

I took out the pen and the bus ticket.
I did not know how to draw such a contract, so I simply put my signature below the lines of figures knocked out by the cash register at the bus station.
I put the pen in my pocket and the ticket upon the long leaves of a pliant willow fork.
I turned my back to the contract – it’s a fair play, no peeping.

A sharp gust of breeze swirled the bushes, but when I turned around the ticket was still in the same fork only turned over to the blank side. 

So that’s your signature?
Clever move, no one can forge.

I went out of the willow thicket to a high brick building, like the central warehouse of the KaPeVeRrZe Plant and started to ask where the personnel department was.
I was told that everything was closed already but after the second shift the bus was going to the city and I had to wait.
I waited a long time, then there was a long ride through the night by a small PAZ bus.

The fellow travelers in twos and threes were leaving the bus in dimly lit streets until the driver told me I had to get off too on the corner of a large empty square.
I saw yellowish lamp lights in a narrow street nearby and went along its fences, then turned to the left.
At the next crossing, I again chose the left turn. 

I heard claws clicking against the asphalt behind my back.
Judging by the sound it was a very big dog, but I was not afraid at all and did not look back and just went on walking slowly.

Ahead the same square opened and, not reaching it some twenty meters, I stopped.
Yes, it was clear – that’s my sentry point.

The lamp on a pillar poured down yellow light but I stood outside its cone where it could not reach my feet.

From the completely dark five-story block on the left, a cat ran stealthily across the road to the yard of a hutta and was met with a joyful jingle of a dog's chain – dating of antipodes. 
Even slaves have it at times.

The night went on and I stood motionless, pretending that I had nothing to do with that crushing din and ramble beyond the horizon where the movement of the universe mechanism was coming to a clash halt because of my fatal mistake in who knows what... 

When a dump truck pulled up behind me, I did not give way, but only threw up my right hand, because that was my post.

Those sitting in the cabin had no heads, impenetrable black darkness cut them off to the shoulders in the throw of the lamplight from the pillar.
The driver, who came down from the cab, had a head.
He led me, with care, aside.
I did not resist.
The dump truck left taking away the second one with the viper asp blackness upon his shoulders.

On the road, the black traces of tires remained. 
They should not be left there – the darkness would follow by those marks.
I began rubbing the traces away with the soles of my shoes.
Would they last long?

The wind was rising, an unfolded newspaper came frisking from the square and rubbed against my shank.
I made out the headline ‘The Prince’s Tomb’.
It had taken it a really long time to get there.
The newspaper rustled its goodbye and slipped further along the asphalt.

The sky became gray.
The exhausted but satisfied cat cautiously returned across the road to the five-story block to go on with her high society life in the lordly estate.
A pitiful whine of despair and pleading clank of the chain sounded after her.

The new day dawned but I stood there until a woman in a white dress appeared on the square.
She walked to the left, to the edge of the square unseen from my post.
An old woman in black appeared in her wake pushing a carriage.
But I knew there was no baby at all.
It’s eggs she was pushing along, white and round.
Grapes of eggs.

And I realized that I could leave my post and go on to the square...

I walked along empty streets until I turned into the door of a factory’s check entrance.
I entered a narrow room and asked for water from an old man in black spetzovka wearing glasses and a cap.

He gave me a glass of water and we both watched closely if I would swallow the black speck floating on the surface. 
I drank all of the water.
The speck remained stuck to the glass wall.
The man in black told me how to get to the Employment Office.

The office turned out to be locked but then a woman with the key came and opened it.
I said that I was looking for a job and she told me to wait for coming one more office worker, who would presently come.

Not far from the office there was an open diary cafe.
For all the remaining kopecks I bought a large bottle of milk.
But I drank only half of it.
Over a tall tumbler of thin glass, I uttered the parting words of Romeo: 
‘Here’s to my love!’
And then I drank it.

When I returned to the employment office the second worker was already in place.
I knew at once that she was Death and the one that came first was Love.

Death looked through my documents and exasperatedly announced that I had been divorced already, but Love smiled and said, that, well, so what? 
Then she went out to the other room to make a phone call and I stayed with the annoyed Death that looked a little like Olga.
Maybe because of her dyed hair, only longer.

On her return, Love said that there was a job for me at the Odessa Mining Management, I had to go to the Pole Explorers Square and see their chief engineer and tell him also to send a car for her because she had forgotten mention it. 
A car for Maria. Okay?

The chief engineer said there was no position for me at the management and only the job of a fastener at a mine which was incongruous with my higher education. 
I hurried to assure him that my education would not be in the way at all and he commanded me to get in the back of a truck standing by the porch of the management and drove me out of the city into the countryside. 

Apart from me, there was a tall and white but shabby refrigerator in the truck-back and a pair of black chains, like from a chainsaw only much longer. 
They looked like mating snakes and with the jostling of the truck-back over the road they kept sneaking up along its floorboards closer and closer to me.

In the village of Vapnyarka, the truck entered the grounds of some manufacture. 
The engineer told me to drop the chains from the back and I threw the damned snakes down into a deep puddle although there was a dry place too.
‘Got crazy?' shouted the chief engineer, but I saw that he liked what I did. 
The driver dragged the drowned serpents to the open door of the warehouse.

We drove to another place in the village and took the refrigerator into one in the group of summer cottages surrounded by a low common garden fence.
The chief engineer stuck its cord into a socket for a check and it hummed satisfied. 
‘I have almost forgotten,’ said I, ‘Maria wanted you to send her a car.’
In fact, I remembered those signal words all the time and only waited for the right moment.

The chief engineer showed how to get to a water tap in the street.
I went there, took off my jacket, washed my hands and arms up to the short sleeves, and also my face and neck.
Two militiamen with officer stars in the shoulder straps stood on one side from me, on the other two army officers in everyday uniform.
They waited patiently while I was splashing because I was with the chief and after that water, no needle would ever be able to pierce my neck skin. 
I walked away wiping myself with the tiny handkerchief that got wet through at once.

The truck left the village and went along the highway again. 
The road entered a steep descent and to the right there opened an inembraceably vast field. 
I could not understand what it was until in a second it woke up and stirred in a movement and long low waves with white crests ran to the shore.
So that is the sea then!

I took out the pocket notebook and, consulting the watch on my wrist, wrote it next to the back cover:

‘July 20, 1979

13 : 30 : 15

Eera

Sehrguey

Lilianna’

The highway went up again.
At the top of the ascent, the truck turned left onto a country road and through the outskirts of a village went to the field where the road ran along a forest belt.
Two kilometers further, after a long gentle tilt there appeared and were passed two or three barrack-like structures and after another hundred meters, the road ended in a wide pit with a cave-tunnel in the opposite wall where a narrow-gauge track ran past the office-cottage of the ‘Dophinovka' mine... 

Three worn-out armchairs with wooden armrests stood in the shaded room.
In the one with its back to the window curtains sat the mine foreman, about forty-five, with a thinning hair on his bald head and a mustache.
From the chair opposite, the chief engineer was telling him with laughter how I had thrown the chain-snakes into the water. 
The foreman did not partake in his mirth and the chief engineer guiltily subsided.
From his wary respect to the foreman, I could see who was really in charge there. 

I was sitting to the right from the foreman and, to his request handed over my passport, a little ashamed of its being so tarnished.
He opened it and, without touching the pages, past his right hand over them.
Their paper brightened before my eyes and got filled with life as if it had just come from the printing house and there even appeared some slight transparent glow from its texture. 
Both the chief engineer and I watched fascinated, we were not capable of miracle-doing... 

It seemed that I, after all, managed to reach the most supreme.
He had long since left the clouds and acquired the form of a foreman at an inconspicuous mine.
His name?
It shall not be taken in vain.
I can only share that he had chosen the patronymic of ‘Yakovlevich’.

I said that all my things were lost at the bus station and I had absolutely no money, and I needed to call my wife, she’d be worried.
The chief engineer at once outstretched a dark-blue five-ruble note to me and said that I would live in the hostel which we bypassed coming to the pit.
I needed no explanations that the hostel, as well as the mine itself, was a mere seeming in the world where one should be on the constant look-out. 
So I took the dark fuzz-mark off the bill and, getting rid of it, put gently on the arm of the chair...

Besides doing my jobs – at first a mine roof fastener, and later an assistant of the stone cutting machine driver, not to mention some short-term labors, I was in a constant tense search for an answer: what was hidden behind that seeming facade?
My looking for the answer continued also in Odessa, where I often went to make a long-distance telephone call to Nezhin from the intercity telephone station on the Pushkin Street.
Where was the money from?
I borrowed it in the hostel from Slavik Aksyanov, or his wife Lyuda.

In the, seemingly, hostel, assumingly, adapted from a, supposedly, cow-farm-house there were four rooms on both sides of a long corridor from end to end of the barrack-like building. 
In one of the rooms lived the childless young family of Aksyanovs.
Their neighbors were a Bessarabian family with a one-year-old baby. 
An elderly single electrician occupied the room next to them.
I was given a room across the corridor from which they took away the radio but left the grates in the window.

First of all, I pulled the iron frame with bars out and put it outside in the tall grass under the window.
Then I whitewashed the walls and for an entire evening was thrashing them with a tube of a rolled up newspaper in the battle with a myriad of vampire mosquitoes.
The following morning Slavik, looking fairly battered, asked what I was doing there all the evening after the repair.
‘Safari.’ said I curtly without going into detail, he obviously got his share in the battle.

The rest of the doors in the corridor were locked except for the first to the right from the entrance where there was a shower.

The mine workers were coming in the morning by a truck from Vapnyarka and New Dophinovka villages.
They drove up whistling and screaming like devils in the truck-back, but they called themselves Makhno bandits. 

Every two days a pair of them were filling the large tank of the shower with water from a small hut in a hollow some thirty meters from the hostel.
There was a deep well with a bucket on a chain around the iron shaft.
Electric heaters heated the water in the tank long before the end of the working shift.

Aside from the barrack-hostel, on the slope overgrown with tall grass, stood a tin paneled outhouse.
There was no door in it, so the facility had to be approached with some kind of a warning noise so as not to catch someone in the posture of an eagle on the roost.
From the doorless toilet there opened a magnificent view of the long sea inlet and its steep opposite shore.

(...there is a concept of ‘the stream of conscience’.
It presumes that a person is able to make mental comments on anything happening around them, or to think about something extraneous, having nothing, at first glance, to do with those happenings. 
By the widely entertained assumption, the Irishman James Joyce is viewed as the creator of 'the stream of conscience’, although he himself brings into play a certain French author from whom he, allegedly, picked up the idea.
However, much earlier that same stream, though not on a too prominent scale, occurred in meditations of the failed-to-be mother-in-law of Prince Myshkin in ‘The Idiot’ by Dostoyevsky.

So, ‘the stream of conscience’ seems to be one of those discoveries that have to be reached repeatedly and in different places, just in case, to ensure it not to be missed.
The ‘stream’, when boiled down, announces to the human race that a person is capable of exchanging thoughts with themselves.

What happened to me in Odessa in that crazy summer of ‘79 which turned out to be the most beautiful summer of my life, can hardly be called a ‘stream of conscience'. 
A stream? I pray, desist!
It was a waterfall!

I exchanged thoughts not just with myself but any-every-one-thing I came across.
Starting from a small pebble on a dusty roadside and to the night stars glinting dew-like in the sky.
‘Seen that?’
And the stars were answering with high-and-mighty indifference:
‘And more than that, and more than once...’
And they went blinking on the way they did the millions upon millions of years before our era.

And it did not bother me at all, that constant and strained wide-spray fire pump thought-gushing.
After all, the human brain is engaged for some 10% of its full capacity.
Let it have a knock-up, sweep away the cobweb and dust accumulated in the remaining percent!

Of course, during working hours the intensity of my brainstorm somewhat decreased – the workplace environment seemed more static and settled when compared to every-second changes of circumstances on the city streets. 
However, I can proudly state that even as deep as 38 meters under the earth surface, the intensity of my mental labor was much higher than the notorious ten-percent standard...)

The mine ‘Dophinovka' produced cubics – three dimensional building stone blocks of 20 x 20 x 40 cm cut out under the ground from the limestone strata. 
For this purpose, a drift tunnel was dipping from the wide pit going under 38-meter of other stratification layers. 
Down the tunnel, on its both sides and at different places there were branching out shafts—also tunnels, but lower and narrower—just like branches from a tree trunk.
At the end of those shaft-galleries there stood stone cutting machines that cut cubics from the wall in front of their noses.
Such was a general picture.

As for the details, my instructor in the roof-fastener job had a sonorous name of ancient Russ princes – Rostislav.
However, he did not respond to this name because of it sounded foreign even to him for everyone knew him as Charlic.

First of all, he led me to the shaft of Machine 3 because of his respectful trepidation before its driver whom Charlic called exclusively with the patronymic ‘Kapitonovich'. 
Being a petty demon, Charlic always made up to Kapitonovich, a stout devil of esteem, who had once served a stretch of ten years.

Both Charlic and I walked holding a flashlight in hand. 
Going to the mine, everybody received one from Lyuda Aksyanova, the lamp-recharger, in her cave by the entrance to the main tunnel.
Without the flashlight, you got into complete pitch-black darkness and could easily stumble at a rail of the narrow-gauge track, or at one of the rarely put sleepers under it and have a nasty fall.
 That’s why everyone in the mine wore a plastic helmet and each morning, before going down, they scribbled their signatures in a ledger to testify that they got instructed on safety rules and now knew their risks and were up to them.

The temperature in the mine was always above zero, even in winter.
A constant calm and underwater silence reigned in the shafts if no one talked to one another and no mechanism was working nearby.

We walked and walked along a narrow low gallery one wall of which bore serifs from a stone-cutting saw and the other was blocked off with a hedge of cubic debris.
The hedge was rather high but did not reach the gallery ceiling. 
In mining, the ceiling is called roof, but more on that later. 

Ahead of us appeared yellow dim light of a pair of light bulbs, crusted with dust, hung from a long white wire on the wall.
The stone-cutting machine stood to face the end wall and Kapitonovich sat waiting for us in its open seat. 
He worked without an assistant because he dreamed of earning 300 rubles a month.

The stone of the end wall in front of the machine—2,5 m x 2,5 m—was already crisscrossed with deep furrows of ‘the sketch'. 
The deep parallel cuts ran between side walls and that same way from the ceiling to the floor forming the butt ends of the future cubics.
Now, you just needed to drive a breaker in one of the slots in the center until a cubic is broken out. 
Then a couple of more next to it and the formed niche would give enough room to start breaking the rest with a sledgehammer. 

Kapitonovich was waiting for us because in the past two days the cutting machine moved forward away from the end of the narrow-gauge track. 
Charlic and I extend the railroad with two pairs of three-meter rails so that the mine cars, aka wagonettes, could be pushed closer to the end wall to stack the broken out cubics on them. 

If a wagonette got derailed, they called it a ‘bored-in wagonette' and two or three workers put it back on the rails, the method being called a ‘fart-steamer'. 

Then a tiny mining locomotive would come down from the open pit and pull back the wagonettes loaded with the cubics, collecting on its way up the loaded wagonettes waiting in the entrances to other machines' shafts. 

Not all of the cubics were breaking evenly off the wall, so before the next ‘sketching' the most sticking out pieces of the limestone had to be knocked off with that same sledgehammer. 

Those fragments together with the spoilage—cubics broken off too short, or split because of the cracks in the stone strata—served as the material to continue laying of the hedge along the shaft wall.
Without that masonry, there would be no room to shove the sand off. 

Where did the sand come from?
When the machine, with howling din and clang of its chain, cuts a furrow in the wall, a long stream of sand, or rather saw dust, gushes from the chain. 
The shield of metal-framed glass protects the machinist from whipping sand, although not from the clouds of dust.
The sand originates a dune around the machine and if it’s not shoved off with a shovel into the ‘pocket’ between the hedge and the wall there would be no room for the narrow-gauged track.

On achieving the labor victory in track-laying, Charlic takes the helmet off his head, puts it down and sits upon as on a potty – that’s much more comfortable than sitting on the floor, or sand, or rubble.
He lights a Prima begged from Kapitonovich and reverently asks about the meaning of the large stain of red in the stone of the right wall.

Kapitonovich explains weightily there once was the sea here with a steamboat on fire, which, eventually, sank leaving the red of the flames in the stone.
Charlic gives out a flattering giggle and I try not to thinks that ten years make a standard stretch for murder because I like Kapitonovich. 

Before leaving for other machines, we fix the roof in the shaft.
For this, Kapitonovich cuts a series of short horizontal slots under the very ceiling of the gallery.
When the stone between the slots is broken away with a breaker, a deep niche of 20 x 20 cm is formed up there.
The same operation is done on the opposite wall.
Now Charlic and I thrust in one of the niches the end of a not too thick log until it stops. 
The other end we raise to the opposite niche and shove inside, not too deep though, so as not to pull the log out from the first one.
This log is called a ‘ploshchuk’.
We prop it up with a pair of ‘stoyaks’ close to the side walls.
Now the shaft roof is fixed.

Where do the logs come from? 
Well, retreating some thirty meters into the darkness of the shaft where we had come from, we pulled out one of the previous fastenings.
Where else could they come from?

In the period of my work at the ‘Dophinovka' mine, there had arrived exactly three new logs. 
I personally ripped the bark off them and Slavik Aksyanov drove the wagonette with the deficit materials to the main tunnel.
So, the roof in the shafts was secured with the economically saved materials.

Sometimes the roof started to ‘drip’ or ‘get rainy’.
That is when it got crackling, splitting and dropping down pieces of rock.
Something like a collapse but not total.

Charlic got under such ‘raining’ in front of my eyes when pulling out one more of ‘economically saved’ logs.
He was lucky, though, laying on the sand heap between the hedge and the wall close to the ceiling.
The dropping plate of stone that separated from the roof did not have a place enough to speed up and just gently lay on his chest. 
Not a too big piece, half a meter to half a meter and only ten centimeters thick.

He immediately remembered Alic the Armenian.
When the roof started to rain, Alic had to retreat for sixteen meters, backward. 
Running, of course, as quick as he could.
Only there was no time to turn around with the roof crackling and falling and catching up.
So he had to run backward shouting all the way: 
‘Fuck the mine! Fuck the money!’
But who? That is the question.
So the roof in mining is not the same as an ordinary roof...

Besides the operating shafts, there also were abandoned ones in the mine. 
The layer of proper stone dwindled out there and they were left.
Entrances to such shafts had been sealed off with a wall of cubic rubble laid on mortar so that prevent drafts.
However, not all of the left off shafts were sealed. 

One time the foreman showed me the emergency exit from the mine.
Through one of such unsealed shafts, we reached the old trunk tunnel where once the wagonettes were pulled by horses. 
That drift also led to the open pit only on a higher level than the present one.
And that old tunnel also had its shafts.
When Charlic had a vacation and I remained the only fastener in the mine, I was pulling the logs from there.

One time I returned to the newer part of the mine, to the machine 4 shaft, so proud and pleased with myself that I was carrying a whole log alone.
With some stupid jest, like:
‘Here’s for Machine 4 by special order from Rio de Janeiro!’
And I dropped the log from my shoulder.
And the bastardy piece of wood—crackle!—fell apart into two.
Too ancient material.
But those gossips as if I was roaming the abandoned shafts without a flashlight were sheer lies.
