
That was because of when someone else’s flashlight was on, I turned mine off.
I did not even know why.
To save the energy?
It made no difference because after the shift all of the flashlights were delivered to Lyuda for recharging.
 A meter long length of wire connected the flashlight to the accumulator in the small canvas shoulder bag.
The flashlight bearing number 16 on its accumulator side was mine. 

In the forsaken shafts, I always turned the flashlight on and once it lit and showed some unearthly beauty. 
I couldn’t get it from afar what those sparkling drops were in the dark gallery.
It’s hard to describe – some spiky pure-white alien structure, or one from the ocean depth where even bathyscaphes could not reach, and there it was shimmering with tiny diamonds in the flashlight beam.
Awfully beautiful.

And I had an ax in my hand for checking if the logs were usable.
I waved the ax above it and the white thing fell to the floor. 
And I saw instead of the beauty there was a big spittle.
Then I guessed that it was a garland of mold.
Later I was coming across the like garlands, but only brown ones as if to punish for the murder of that beauty.

Then Charlic returned from his vacation and a new worker, Vasya, was given a job of a fastener and I got the job of an assistant of the stone cutting machine driver.

Well, it's not as romantic as walking the abandoned shafts and it's deafening, and the nose and mouth must be covered with a cloth because of the dust, but—wow!—familiar all faces! 
Breaker, Shovel, and Sledgehammer. 

However, all that was so at the first, uninitiated, glance.
What actually produced the ‘Dophinovka' mine under the unadvertised supervision of the supreme chief, that is Yakovlevich? 
Well, it depended.
Jedem das Seine.

The mining engineer Pugachov, who showed his pyramidally straight nose down there once a month, was interested in gold only. 
Or rather in the gold sand.
He would suck at the gold crown of a fang in his mouth and quietly ask the machinist: 
‘Enough sand today?’

After I had (unintentionally) heard him say that I started to dust out my spetzovka pockets at the end of each shift. 
Like, you’re not gonna buy me with your vile metal!
Moreover, that I did not know how to turn that sand into gold.
Tolik, the driver from Machine 2, got stunned when saw what I was getting rid of.

But there it was turned into gold indeed and then, under the guise of aluminum castings, stacked in the tall grass nearby the hostel.
Exactly like ingots of bank gold reserves, only of aluminum color, for camouflage, of course.
The foreman told me it himself in the almost open text: 
‘Such a worth and no one has brains to pick up, littered this way.' 
And where a mine for cubic production would get aluminum ingots from?
Or for what purpose?

As for the cubics themselves, they, naturally, were souls.
The Machine 5, for example, the machinist of which was Hitler, or else, Adolf (well, anyway, everybody called him so: either Adolf or Hitler) was producing human souls. 

Ivan, from Machine 1, felt hurt indeed that when his wagonettes were pulled to the pit up there, lots of his cubics were rejected, while anything from Adolf—albeit uneven and defected—went through. 
But, if you think about it, so it is – many human a soul happen with flaws.

And what is paradoxical, his namesake—Hitler—ruined so many souls, and this one, down here, turns them out slapdash and sneers at Ivan.

Whose souls were sawed out by other machines, I could only guess.
For archangels? Demons? Titans?. 

That’s what really depressed me most – my ignorance.

Yes, I felt, that I was a chosen one, but I remained a so sorely ignorant chosen.
Advancement to understanding went in trial and error method, checking each hunch I had on the way.

Sometimes there happened real insights as it was when I went to New Dophinovka after the shift to buy food for the next couple of days. 

Among the workers in the truck-back, there was some old woman in a headscarf. 
We were driving past the hostel and the Bessarabian stood in the doorway with the baby in her arms. 
‘So a nice baby-girl!' pronouncing these words the old woman released her headscarf and tied it up again but somehow different. 

I returned home walking through the fields along the forest belt.
But I could not get a rest in my room – the one-year-old girl of the Bessarabian family was choking with shrieks and crying, and her mother, not knowing how to ease the baby, was carrying her along the corridor—from end to end—rocking in her arms, saying ‘ah-ah!', but nothing helped. 

I can’t bear children crying, but the hostel is not a local train where you can move to another car.
And suddenly I remembered how the woman in the truck-back had tied her headscarf differently while praising this, so calm at that time, child.
I went out into the corridor and silently, but steadily looking at the baby's mother, took out my handkerchief from the pocket, stretched it open and folded back again, yet on the other side, after which I went out to the well-hut to fetch some water. 
When I returned the woman gave me a happy grateful look; the girl in her arms was perfectly calm, a kerchief had appeared on her head tied in a knot on the forehead. 
Bingo!

But there were misfires too.
The rooster walking around the hostel did not understand my fair intentions and contemptuously turned away when I offered him a grain of laundry blue from the pinch scattered on the bench at the hostel entrance.
The proposed supplement to the ration of the bird was based on good motives and freshly gained experience.
That day it was revealed to me, that the combination of blue and black symbolize strength: the cock with his black plumage would turn a super-cock had he picked that laundry blue speck...

And the fact that I was both chosen and protected one became obvious when one of the glassy-eyed was sneaking to me with undoubtedly vicious intentions...

There are three varieties of glassy-eyed.
Those in whom eye glassiness is combined with pronounced transparency of the eyeballs are harmless.
They, surely, are possessed, but remain just tools for obtaining information, like, what’s up and on and how it goes? – kind of a spyglass nothing more.

Where does the information flow? Who's the recipient? 
The former dwellers of Olympus in their current forms, be sure.

The second variety, with blurry luster filming their glass, are self-employed freelancers looking for a chance refreshment of ‘red and hot’ or somehow otherwise to get recharged on your account.
‘There's an underground passage for people, but we too may pass through,' one of them told me, apparently taking for one of her likes when in an unfamiliar and poorly lit area of night Odessa, I asked her how to get to the bus station – their favorite feeding trough. 

Those it was, waiting for me to get out of the ‘Bratislava’ with the torn thigh and they impatiently demanded of the woman in the cloakroom not to talk so much and set the game (me) out, for them to hunt...

When I was having a medical check for the employment (two weeks later after getting the job)  they also took my blood sample for analysis in the Vapnyarka village.
On entering the office I saw, besides the nurse, a lady sitting on the couch.
That same murkiness in eyes and a long flexible tube hanging from a corner of her mouth.
The nurse explained: the tube was just a probe, and the lady would not be in the way.
As if I could not see from her looks what kind of lady it was and why she was there…

The nurse, as usual, pierced my finger and squeezed, and the blood, instead of dropping, burst up in a tiny jet, no thicker than a needle, as the milk squeezed from a nipple of a breastfeeding woman.
I had never seen such a thing in my life!
And not only me – the lady’s jaw dropped and that, let’s say, probe wanted to pop out too.
Just like an alcoholic that had handed out a cup for a shot but they splashed in it a whole three-liter jar of moonshine.
What a loss of precious stuff!

As for reaching to the blood with their fangs, that’s just grandmother’s tales.
To get fueled they use some inconspicuous, unknown to me, but efficient technology.

The glassy-eyed of blurry type, who wanted to hunt me was a Volga driver having brought his boss to the hostel.
There also was a rarely opened office of the mining engineer visited by those arranging cubics to be taken from the pit.

That day, as always I came from the mine to hostel for the midday meal and was washing my hands by the washstand on the pole not far from the entrance.
The glassy-eyed did not know me because of being an outsider and he was sneakily closing in on me holding in the hands his weapon – an artifact of aluminum wire twisted in a special way, about twenty centimeters long.
Seeing that blurry filmed glassiness in his eyes and the cautious way of his crawling nearer, I realized that I was done.
The distance lessened yet the moment when he already could reach me with his thing, a gray kitten jumped out from the tall grass and rubbed his scruff against my black spetzovka pants. 

The glassy-eyed instantly lost any interest in me, lowered his wire and returned to the car.
The unknown rescuer-kitten who I never—before or later—had seen, disappeared into the grass...

But more often I had to rely only on my own prudent circumspection.
As on that narrow beach under the cliff of Chabanka.

I wanted to take a swim in the sea and had already entered the peaceful slow waves but stopped – two fishermen in swimming trunks with fishing rods in their hands stood ahead. 
Between them, there was enough space to swim forwards, but I realized that the rods were the barrier blocking the way to the sea. 
Only seizing the moment when they simultaneously pulled their fishing rods up, I plunged in and swam away from the beach. 

I swam for a long time, sometimes laying on the water for a rest and wondering why my father told that seawater supports a swimmer because of the salt in it. 
It made no difference to lying on the fresh water.

Then I swam again on my back facing the bright sky until I felt a touch on my shoulder. 

I looked back and saw a jellyfish in the water, semi-transparent and as wide as a basin. 
I swam around it but then I began to come across more and more jelly-fish – dodging one you run into another.

Popping up a bit out from the water I looked forward and saw a whole crowd of them and that they had turned the calm sun-driven waves into some jellyfish soup filled with their translucent bodies. 
I didn't get the nerve to breast that jellyfish soup, I turned back and swam back to the already distant shore. 

The shingle beach of Chabanka had some sandy stretches.
On one of them, near the water's edge, I wanted to write ‘Eera', but the waves did not allow. 
They ran up and leveled the wet sand before I had time to write out all the letters and I only scratched my finger to bleeding with the tiny shell fragments mixed with sand before I gave up.

But my first meeting with the sea was on the beach of New Dophinovka.
I went there after work, along the shore of the sea inlet that reached the hostel. 
The water in it was shallow and very transparent.
I walked until saw in the water some worn-out tires dropped there from the shore by stupid fools.

I took off my pants, went into the shallow water and dragged the tires on shore, but after one more bend of the inlet, I saw there was an entire trash dump in it  – a life would not be enough to drag all that out and it was evening already. 
Then there was a thicket of reeds stretching to the highway on the other side of which the wide vista of sea...

But when going to New Dophinovka by the country road, there sometimes were huge ships hovering above the sea.
The ships, of course, stood in the sea which merged with the sky so watching the view you saw a field and a ship above it and still higher or next to its bow the immense red ball of the setting sun.
Those ships were so large that they, probably, do not fit in the port and had to stay right there among the sea and sky.

With Slavik Aksyanov, I at first had normal relationships, even though I saw that in his past life he served as a Nazi officer in a death camp, and in the present liked to attracted public attention by empty talks.
And I even helped him to saw boards for the family couch.

The distance from Chabanka to the mine was also some two kilometers, but with no forest belt along the country road.
And in the fields, some arrogant flies always started to follow me, a whole swarm of them. 
They kept buzzing around and never lag behind.
But I did not want to bring a ‘tail of a follower’ behind me and thereby give out the location of the mine and I found a nice way of putting them off the track.
Nearby the hostel there stood a long structure of a former cattle farm which I used as the disinfection lock of a spaceship on unexplored planets. 

I entered the building from one end with all the flies swarming around and went to the exit at the other end.
The whiff of manure from once upon a time called then from everywhere, confused, they rushed in all directions in active search of fresher shit and I went out into the air with the food bought in Chabanka without a single buzzing follower behind my back... 

Slavik asked permission from the foreman to use some floorboards from the old farm to make a couch for himself and his wife because he was waiting for the arrival of his mother-in-law. 
Then we went and pulled out the boards for the project.
A rather decent material they were, only nailed too deep, but we had got a breaker. 

And then we started to discuss the future furniture dimensions. 
By that time I had already an entire well-developed numerological system.
With some of the individual figures there was even reached a complete clarity, that, for instance, 22 meant ‘death', 24 – ‘wife', 10 – ‘sex', and so on, and then just combine them the way called for by the situation. 

With the purpose of the product in mind, I offered him the best solution: 2 meters 10 centimeters.
Which read that 10 for 2 is the very thing for a young family.
But he balked!
‘I wanna have 2 meters and 30!’
Okay, you better know what you want…

He dragged a ‘goat’-trestle from somewhere, on which they saw the firewood and we started.
A board on the ‘goat’, two marks with the tape measure and – off we go!
Then we stopped to have a smoke.
At that moment his wife, Lyda, was passing by to the hostel entrance.
She pointed at the ‘goat’ and indignantly declared to Slavik:
‘Don’t you hope, that I ever lie upon this thing!’
That’s when I got finally convinced that she was a part of a different world.
What normal woman had never seen a ‘goat’?

Apart from that, she could read thoughts.
I once entered their room, Slavik ate soup watching television.
I said I was not hungry and sat by the door to wait for him to finish off his havvage.
And behind his back there stood a refrigerator with a mirror put on its top face down.
The mirror frame had a pair of plastic legs to keep it upright when not in the lying position.
From the chair I was sitting in the puzzle collected into a coherent picture: Slavik, eating the TV with his stare, ladles the soup into himself with two green legs sticking out of his hair in the form of lyre-shaped horns, only without strings, of course.

Then I thought to myself, that is, inside my mind:
‘So, you're not only a Nazi but a cuckold too!' 
Lyuda read that thought and directly went to the refrigerator, she put the legs down and gave me an eloquent look.
Like, we need no of your comments on the skeletons in our family cupboard!

In general, when Slavik fired up the test flights on that aerodrome of a couch in their room, there cropped up some inconsistencies in the game. 
Three days later he dragged it out of the hostel in the tall grass and shortened with a hacksaw. 
That is what the trial and error method is about.

And when his mother-in-law came he started to have fits of frenzy.
He visited my room and made faces.
The purpose of his grimaces was clear to me without any explanations – he wanted to drive me mad. 

Once Ivan, the driver of Machine 1, called me to share a meal with him and his assistant in their shaft.
His wife worked in the canteen of the military school where also were trained Negroes from the countries of awakened Africa.
So those Afro-Africans were not too hungry, judging by the amount of provision she brought home from there. 

When Ivan removed the lid from that aluminum pan, it was brimming with meat on ribs, and nothing else. 
The three of us—Ivan, his helper and I—hardly managed to finish off that hecatomb, leaving a pile of bare ribs beside the pan. 
And then Slavik came to borrow some spare part for his machine, on seeing that cannibal still-life he distorted his mug in earnest bitten by the recollection of everyday oats from his mother-in-law, most likely.

Later in the evening, when the hostel residents were enjoying the coolness of nearing night, he wanted to fight me.
He even snatched one ingot from the gold stock in the tall grass, raised it with both hands over his head and threw at me.
The action resulted in a really beautiful sight – the full moon pouring its tender light onto the arc-shaped trajectory along which the ingot flew gleaming with white, apparently aluminum color.
(Maybe, I was wrong after all and the mine was mining platinum?)

Now it was my turn to ran backward in the manner of Alic the Armenian.
Slavik’s wife, Lyuda, took him home from the arena of demonstration performances.

In my next visit to Odessa, I dropped to a legal consultation.
I did not plan it at all, just their office sign caught my eye.
Without leaking any names or geographical locations I asked for a recommendation if pestered by a neighbor in the hostel.
‘Turn to the Komsomol Committee of your enterprise.’
Well, and those also not of this world.
I told you – they are everywhere already.

But if the Supreme Head was Yakovlevich, then who the chief engineer was?
It’s not difficult to guess – who’s the Creator’s antipode?
Prince of Darkness and master of all impure, in all his glory.

That could be seen even in their relationship – respectful, but armed neutrality.

I remember them standing in the tunnel and talking to each other, correctness itself.
The foreman in his black spetzovka and the chief engineer in a summer shirt with a white handkerchief bent over its collar to keep the dust off.
If there was safari helmet on his head instead of the plastic one it would be a ready picture ‘I’m the master here!’
Although, of course, the depths under the ground are his domain.

(...you could protest: how’s possible a contact between such antagonistic opposites?
Do not forget – it was the twentieth century around, in its second half, when everything got so intertwined, confused and tangled that a simplistic geometry no longer helped…)

I took the position of a sympathizer to the foreman.
I liked him and without miracles, moreover, that for me, in fact, the one with the passport was enough.

By the way, the chief under Chief also presented his credentials.
One day during the midday break he came to hold a trade union meeting. 
(Ahem.)
We settled under the trees by the hostel.
He got seated on a chair and took off his shoes, and socks too.
Like, who’d ever told I had hooves?
Nothing of the kind!
But I was not to be caught with illusory chaff.

The devils of Makhno bandits lay down in the shady grass in their black spetzovkas. 
Only I was in the nylon shirt which I wore in the mine under the spetzovka jacket and every evening washed in the shower.

(...nylon is ideal for washing: you rub it for six seconds and its clean and it gets dry even faster…) 

I also took off the helmet.
Like, you wanna make me believe you’ve got no hooves? So, admire then my hornlessness.
All the other workers had their helmets on, especially Slavik Aksyanov.

And so it went on for some ten minutes when suddenly the rooster crowed.
Surprise!
The chief who’s not the Chief shoved his socks into his pockets and thrust his feet into the shoes and raced to the country road.
And there, as if from under the ground, popped up a biker in black and in a black leather ribbed helmet, like the miners wore at the times of the first five-year plans. 
And they whizzed off in the New Dophinovka direction.
Not clear enough?
Who shoots away at a rooster crowing?

Not that I confronted with him, but there were certain frictions.
So it was when a truck dumped a heap of coal for the winter and I shoved all that anthracite into the stoke-hold.
At the end of that day he came from Vapnyarka and asked me, haughtily so:
‘Well, how much you want? Three rubles enough?’

I grew amok: half a day in the sun, and he, as to a dirty wretch, offered a pittance.
Okay, you’re the prince of darkness, but I am also a chosen, even if not initiated.
‘No!' said I, ‘let I am paid the worth of my labor.' 
‘You won’t get such an amount then.’

I did not believe him and the next day applied for a day-off and went to the Mining Management in the Pole Explorers Square.
I was shown the door of the chief accountant office, Weitzman was his name. 
No sooner had I stepped into his office than the phone on the desk rang. 
He took off the receiver:
‘You are listened to.’

(...just like that, word for word: ‘you’re listened to.’
Clear, smooth, distanced.
Without sticking his neck out for a fraction of a millimeter. 
That's some Weitzman for you!..) 

I depicted the essence of the matter in hand, he got it at once and took out a thick book in a gray paperback ‘The Unified Norms and Tariffs’, and he found in it where it was about loading and unloading of loose coal and gave me to read.
There it stood in black and white, that even if I were shoveling that coal in an area north of the Arctic Circle—to be paid with the highest northern coefficients applied—and with each shovelful of coal I were circling three times around the hostel before throwing it into the stokehold window—to gain the distance of moving the load—then, by the rates from that normative bible, I was entitled to the payment of 1 ruble and 20 kopecks. 

(...and it was revealed unto me, who did not know the truth hitherto, that to foremen, supervisor, engineers, etc., etc., should the workmen bow low for the lies added to work orders.
Without the addition of false figures, the working class would die out long ago together with their families. 
Pray for your benefactors and bread givers, workmen!
But what bastard composed all those rates and tariffs?
I would share my shovel with them in a brotherly way…)

His diggings were near Hunchback Bridge in Odessa.
There he lived in a house of his own, together with his wife and their son, fifth-grader.
He treated me to a glass of home-made tomato juice.
(Ahem…)
Everything as expected – some red, thick, brackish liquid. 
But could I say ‘no’?
Margarita also drank it, at the annual ball in Moscow.

Yet till now, I brew the black tea after the recipe he shared.
That evening he also shared his memories about working in the Arctic, where, after work, he put a pair of bricks on an electric stove and seated his wife on top of them to bring into the working conditions for the night... 
