
One time the impure attempted at a putsch, they wanted to change the world layout of stratification.
The day before it the mining engineer Pugachov arrived at the hostel and opened one of the locked doors in the corridor. 
Like, to distribute food products to be paid for later, at the payday.
I walked along the corridor and Slavik Aksyanov shouted to me from that room:
‘Come on, come get it too!’
There were five Makhno devils inside and a box of ‘Prima’ packs upon the desk.
Pugachov was meting out from 5 to 10 packs each.
Food products, eh? Ammunition supplies!
‘No, thank you, ‘Belomor’ is my smoke.’
Going out I still heard Slavik motivating the devils:
‘No fear! Youth will write off everything!’

The next day not a single traffic light worked in Odessa.
It was a day of complete bedlam.
People were shouting at each other and the trolleybuses jumping like mad.
There was no shooting, of course, because the putsch went on on a different level.
However, by my estimations, it failed because I was in time to buy ‘The World Atlas’, a thin booklet in a soft green paperback.

In Odessa of that period, the most stable and widely used expression of approval was ‘that, what you love!’
‘How do you like Sonya’s new groom?’
‘That, what you love!’
And, instead of ‘no', they said ‘dick to mama!' 
But, with Odessa-Mommy around, it sounded even patriotic.
‘So ‘Black-Sea Footballer' won, or what?' 
‘Dick to mama!’

In the small park on Deribassov Street, grew some unseen trees looking, as if they had cast off their own bark.
In the evening there played the brass band, almost like in the times of Johann Strauss, but rarely.
And in some other park, but by day, I jumped into the pool from a five-meter high tower,
It even whistled in the ears during the dive.
A little later two boys jumped two, holding hands, but it was a heels-first flight, one of them had black socks on.
They were concealing my footprints from possible followers that way.

At the intercity phone calls station in Puskin Street, they played a good joke on me. 
I made the order and waited, then went out onto the sidewalk and stood by the open door.
The moment I lit a cigarette the loudspeaker inside shouted:
‘Nezhin! Is anyone waiting for Nezhin?!’
I threw the cigarette into a trash bin by the door and ran back.
‘It’s me! I am waiting!’
And the telephone operator in her microphone:
‘So, wait then!’
The crowd in the hall split their sides.
That again, they were saving me from something.

Some mujik was waiting there too.
They announced his number connected:
‘Chelyabinsk on line! Enter Booth 5!’
To which with unconcealed disappointment he reacted:
‘Eew!’
And went where was told to.
That's an enlightened one! But merely the booth number he knew beforehand the talk result! 

I got to know Odessa very well.
On foot, for the most part. 
I found Public Library Nr. 2.
And the bazaar of Pryvoz, where the porters in blue robes pushed station trolleys in front of them with the shouts ‘Feet! Feet!’, so that the crowd would give way to them with their abbreviated 'watch your feet!'.
There, in Pryvoz, an old gypsy cast a spell on me by their witchcraft means.
I did not get it why, but she should know better. 

The Factory of Gastric Juice.
Who would ever imagine there were such enterprises!

When I passed through the yards of five-story blocks, mujiks playing ‘the goat’ would bang the bones louder against the tables to shoo off the cats so they would not run across the sidewalk in front of me.
Allies too.
To Odessa I was going by bus, only a couple of times on foot.
There were just twenty kilometers all in all.

And one time I went from Vapnyarka to New Dophinovka along the seashore, over the cliff. 
In one place there stood some military installation behind the fence of barbed wire.
The sentry shouted from there it was forbidden to walk by their site and demanded to show my documents.
I showed him through the wire my handkerchief with the sailing boat in the circle.
He realized at once that the level was different.
‘Okay, go where you were going.’

From up the cliff, the sea view was very beautiful. 
The sea was quiet, almost smooth. 
And sparkled under the sun.
Sometimes the wind rushed along to ripple the water and draw various types of galaxies.
Spiral, for the most part.
The wind was copying them from the clouds that hovered above the sea.

In a tram to the beach of Arcadia, I saw Gray from our construction battalion. 
It surprised me a little – four years had passed and he remained looking so young and for some reason in the black sea cadet uniform, the cap with ribbons.
I stood up and quietly asked into his ear: 
‘Gray, is it you?’
He did not respond although heard me for sure.

And another time it was my father.
By a newsagent booth.
He did not look like my father at all, I only recognized him by his voice.
It was with that voice he described the murderer, whom the camp chief brought to a new murder.

When he spoke to me, I pretended that I was overly examining a portrait of the psychiatrist Burdenko on the ‘Ogonyok’ magazine cover, which hung behind the booth wall glass, so it was the seller who answered him.

(...with such meetings anyone will start asking themselves: what’s going on?
But you can't get an answer to it without understanding the monad. 
A monad is a gadget from philosophy, which every one understands in their own way. 
For someone, it is a singularity from a set, and for someone else –  a set of singularities. 
For example, when a guy asks his girl:
‘Tell me! Am I for you just another one of many, or from many the one?’
Here the second ‘one’ is that very monad, or, maybe, vice versa.

In some Indian Bible, there is a bright picture: a child creeps along the grass, a step ahead of him a kid is running, before which a man walks, just about to overtake a crooked old man, and then again the grass. 
The picture is called ‘The Circle of Life’.
That is, from nothing to nothing.
Now, all together they are one monad because it's the same person. 
And it only remains to assume, that monads can be formed in a different way; for example by the timbre of a voice; and everything falls into place. 
It depends on from which end you approach the monad: from here – it's your father, from that one – a homeless drifter addresses you by the stall with Burdenko. 

Of course, all that is a bit more complicated than memorizing the chant: ‘if you stumble with your left leg – everything would be okay, when with the right – not even try, turn back and go away’,
but explains a lot…)

One of the Odessa Preferans players was in his youth a part of the underground.
Then he reformed and began to collaborate with the television studio of Odessa as a commentator of the latest criminal news. 
He even wrote a book sharing impressions from his bandit past.
So he claims in that book that the year of your birth, and especially the summer was marked in Odessa by an unseen surge in the violent crime situation. 
A rare case when the printed text could not convince me.
That summer I myself was present there and did not notice anything of the kind.

Which speaks in favor of the theory of the existence of parallel worlds.
Both the reformed commentator and I lived in the parallel world of his, each of us two was receiving different impressions from different worlds connected only by the ordinal number of the year.
For all my repeated detours and passes through Odessa, I had noted only two occasions of the interpenetration of our parallel worlds. 

The first happened in the morning on the bus Gvardeyskoye-Odessa, when a young guy on the second seat on the right rebuked the driver for a minor change in the route within the city.

Upon arrival to the bus station by New Bazaar, the driver hurried from his cabin into the bus with apologies and technical (maybe even over obsequious to some extent) explanations.
He was forgiven when the other passenger from the same seat spoke for him to her easily irritable companion.

The second interpenetration occurred in the building of the railway station where I asked a militiaman about the number of population in the city of Odessa.
For an answer, he directed me to the police station on the first floor. 
The on-duty lieutenant to whom I repeated the question, told me to wait for a little. 

Obedient to his instruction, I leaned against the barrier separating us and watched as the red worms of his lips lustfully covered, squeezed and twirled the filter of his unlit cigarette under the accompaniment of heavy thuds and loud yells behind my back. 
With a fleeting glance to that direction, I noted the open door to the next room where a woman in a kerchief and the black robe of a janitor was kicking the shit out of a wretch in just his red underpants with the wooden handle of her mop. 
I never turned back again until the end of the execution, especially since under my trousers there were exactly the same underpants.
On getting the pleasure in accordance with his rank and position, the lieutenant lit the cigarette and said that a million was not reached yet; maybe about six hundred thousand people.

That's why when on my next visit to the city and being late for the last bus to New Dophinovka, I preferred the greens inside the circular intersection in front of the railway station to spend the night. 
It turned out to be completely deserted because the underground passage to it was unlit.
Having chosen the most distant from the lamppost bench, I lay down.
On hard bench beams I recollected Edgar Poe killed in Baltimore, state of Maryland, for $40—a literary fee he had just been paid—and partly pulled out the advance I received that day in Pole Explorers Square, like a flirty handkerchief made of three-ruble notes, for the purpose of self-training my courage.
The traffic along the circular intersection had almost ceased, but the bench became even harder. 
However, I kept my eyes shut for the principle's sake because night is for sleeping. 

And I was not sleeping, when I heard cautious steps along the rounded path.
He walked up and for a minute stood over me lying on the bench with Edgar Poe’s mustache, in a blue T-shirt with the Soviet three-ruble banknotes protruding from the breast pocket on it.
Then he left as quietly as when approaching.
I did not open my eyes, for the sake of principle, to see who it was.

In the morning I woke up on the same bench rather chilled and stiff as a board but, unlike the great American romantic, alive.

A flock of ravens flew croaking in the dawn sky, flapping their wings.
Seemingly the same ones that coasted above Nezhin in the northeastern direction on the day D.
It took them a long time to get here. 

A feather separated from the wing of one of them and, somersaulting in zigzags, kept falling down.
The face upturned, I followed the jerky trajectory and walked to intercept it despite the dug up beds with welking flowers.
At the meeting point, I reached my palm out under the black dodger, caught it and went back to the asphalted path. 
There I dropped it tenderly into a trash bin saying:
‘Not with me around, please.’

(...a lesser-known German poet from the first half of the 20th century once complained of his unworthiness, otherwise, he would not allow for the world self-massacre. 
Few of the venerable laureates rise to such deep understanding of a poet’s responsibility for the fate of the world.
They inertly cling to the accepted standpoints and rituals of their time, and yet, if you think about it closely…)

However, just to think is not enough, it’s also necessary to think out, as Valentin Batrak, aka Lyalka, cared to say somewhere.

On reaching the deadline for my return and taking you and Eera over, there, in fact, was no place to bring you to.
However, having given the word, I had no choice but come back and at least explain the reasons for the postponement of the move.

I had no money for the travel, neither anyone I addressed for a loan.
The need called for the idea to hand the wedding ring over to the pawnshop.
While I found it in the city, it had already opened and the line started from the front door.

The pawnshop was a long room with barriers along three walls.
There were small rounded windows in the sheet glass partitions above the barriers and one of them even had grates.
To that very window, the farthest one was lining all that crowd.
When the pawnshop was closing for the midday break I was forth from that window.

In the breast pocket of my shirt, I had the ring which hardly could rape off the finger the night before.
Even the soap and water from the washstand near the hostel were of little help.
At those self-inflicted tortures, I remembered the projectionist's booth in the Plant Park and sympathized with Olga. 

The pawnshop opened again and after waiting for one more hour I fearfully handed the ring to the window because a person before me failed – her earring turned out not to be of gold.
My ring passed checking and I received 30 rubles together with the pawnshop ticket.

The following morning I came to New Bazaar and bought a blue plastic mesh, and four kilos of apricots to fill it with, they were not fully ripe though.
Then I went to the booth with flowers and said that I needed three red roses.
For the flower girl, it sounded like a special password and from a special place behind the counter she took out small dark red roses, exactly three, on sturdy long stalks. 
‘You meant these?’
‘Sure.’

From the bazaar, I went to the airport—not much better than the one in Stavropol—and stood in the line till the midday break. 
When the ticket office window was closed, I remained standing nearby, like a statue with the three red roses in my hand, and only put the apricots on the floor under the window. 
Keeping four kilos for an hour was too much of strain for a hand.

After I bought the ticket, there remained four hours before the departure and I was already tired of life with my hands busy keeping something.
I took the flowers and the fruits to the automatic storage cells, but I could not leave them inside because I felt sorry for them.
They would suffocate there with the air and light cut off.
Looking around a small corridor I found the janitors room and asked for permission to leave the roses and apricots there.
They accepted them and I went out into the city hands-free but I did not go too far away. 

At six I came after the roses.
The janitors were washing the floor in the corridor and one of them told I'd better wait. 
I insisted on getting them at once for to get in time on the plane departing in half an hour.
She grinned and without further arguing let me take the roses sticking out of one of their tin pails with water. 
The janitor only warned that they had treated themselves on the apricots a little bit.

I went to a long shed on the edge of the take-off field and, together with other passengers with the tickets for that flight, waited until midnight because each half an hour the loudspeakers announced a delay of the flight to Kiev.
My fellow travelers also tried the apricots and approved.

After the midnight, in the sharp light of the arc lamps along the runway, two stewardesses were counting us on the stairs to have no more than 27 passengers because they substituted for the flight a smaller aircraft, AN-24.
When on board, it took some time to become warm after the chilly night breeze from the sea during that long wait.
I’d better have agreed to the janitor.

At the takeoff, I was fighting down the thoughts that they could have brought the asphalt while I was away.

At the mentioned meeting of the trade union, the chief engineer informed that the builders had come across sharps in their scores.
For those unfamiliar with the music notation, he put two fingers of his left hand over two on the right one, crosswise, representing prison grates. 
Therefore the construction works would continue those who wanted to live in the new hostel.
The Aksyanovs and I enlisted for moving to the new hostel and the Bessarabian family abstained.

The new hostel was located about twenty meters from the old one and also was a former cattle-farm building.
The rooms in the future hostel were spacious and high.
I chose the one with the view of the sea inlet.
However, the walls of our would-be home still needed plastering and the window frames were without the glass, but I liked our place even though it had neither doors nor the floor yet. 

Once they dumped a truckload of hot black asphalt next to the new hostel for to make floors in the rooms. 
Aksyanov and the assistant at his machine were carrying asphalt with a wheelbarrow to the Aksyanov's rooms, and I with a pair of pails to ours. 
They managed to make asphalt floor in both of his rooms, and I in the half of just one, but of better quality before the asphalt heap outside was finished off. 
That’s why while the plane was gaining altitude I did not want the asphalt to be brought without me around.

Then I started looking out of the window.
The moon was absent from the cloudless sky, but the stars were shining, thousands of distant stars.
And below the lights of cities and towns, no bigger than the stars in the sky, were shimmering too. 
And I thought I’d like for the pilot not to lose his way among all those stars from every direction.

Then deep below under the wing of the plane, I could make out the lights in some, probably, a village that exactly repeated positioning of the stars in the only two constellations known to me in the night sky. 
The village lights presented a replica of the Little Dipper and I calmed down because it’s impossible to get off the right course with the Polar Star in the view.

At six in the morning I got off the Kiev-Moscow train at the station of Nezhin and by the first bus of the day came to Red Partisans.
The door was opened by Ivan Alexeyevich who hardly recognized me because I had become so lean.
I took the blue plastic mesh with the apricots to the kitchen and carried the red roses to the bedroom past the sofa in the living room where the mother-in-law was already starting to move.
Both of you were asleep.

I put the roses on the table under the pier mirror and look behind the window curtain.
The handkerchief with the anchor was gone from the windowsill.
Okay, I could ask later. 
I undressed went to bed and hugged Eera in her long white nightgown.
‘Oh! You?’
‘Yes.’
‘So scraggy?!’
‘Hush, you’ll wake up the baby.’

Then Eera told that her sister Vita was on a visit in Odessa and wanted to see me at the mine.
She reached the village of New Dophinovka, but a villager Natalia Kurilo advised against going any further because of a too difficult road. 
‘Yes, that Natalia sits at the mine office in the pit up there.’
‘She complained that you don’t listen to anyone but the foreman.’
‘How could she know? She sits up there.’
‘So she knows if she’s saying... And how is all over there?’
‘There all is so… class. The sea is… well, in general… Ships above the field...’
‘But you got really skinny… Have you had it with someone there?’
‘You crazy?!’
‘Quiet! Don't wake the baby up! Well.. you were doing something now… You've never been doing that before.' 
‘Ah… I got it from the stone cutting machine. The disks move that way.’
‘What’s your position there?’
‘Some long-named one. The assistant of the stone cutting machine driver. But to myself, I call me shorter – a phallic associator.' 
‘What’s that?’
‘From old Greek. It’s a long story.’
‘And what about housing conditions there?’
‘We’ll have two room. So big. Tolik from Machine 2 says they are well located. Looking away from the winter winds. And the sea inlet under the windows.’
‘But look at yourself! Thin as a rake!’
‘Hush! The baby!.’

But you still got awake.

‘Look, where’s the handkerchief that I've left on the windowsill?’
‘What handkerchief? I've never seen any.’

In general, that’s correct.
To see a thing you have to know what you’re looking for.
I, for example, could not recognize the sea at once. 

(...so the sailing boat had not found its anchorage and later it disappeared too.
Maybe up to now, it's still sailing the expanses of the universe somewhere…) 

Of course, it was not very pleasant to hear from Eera that they told her in the maternity hospital that her hymen had not been completely broken and you had to do it from the other side.
For my part, I did not feel any change after such an unorthodox loss of virginity by my wife.

I also did not feel any guilt, because I always did as best I could.
Besides, she was not the first virgin to give birth.
Leaving aside the Holy Family, our particular case was the result of programming through a novel of a French writer Herve Bazin, which I read back in my adolescence.
Although there was no birth-giving, yet, anyway, I should not be given to read just anything at all...) 

I went to Konotop to collect warm clothes, the sheepskin coat, rubber boots.
My father gave me his black navy pea-jacket with copper buttons in two upright rows.
I even took my guitar with me, because I was moving in earnest and for a long time.
And in Konotop, they also were grumbling that there had remained only half of me, but I felt great. 
My mother wrapped the things in a white cloth and sewed it up.
It turned out a bulky and thick bale.

But I had to do one more thing.
To do and – cut and run.
To do, and lie low at the bottom, in the mine of ‘New Dophinovka’.

(...Throughout all these five years plus, I was perfectly aware that everything should be paid for.
Nothing is given for nothing.
And I don’t mean money for pot, which goes without saying.
I mean the main payment for getting stoned, high and on the flights.
And the closer to the final full-stop in the trough of the common urinal at the Kiev intercity bus station, the deeper I realized that I even knew who exactly was paying the unreasonably high—more expensive than any money—price for my buzz. 
I had neither desire nor opportunity to share that knowledge with anyone because of its being a complete crazy nonsense. 
That's why I silenced it and kept it hid and buried away even from myself, but it came back to me over and over again—even when not stoned—that I was irredeemably indebted to the long-suffering people of Cambodia sweating in the sub-equatorial hothouse climate of southeastern Asia. 
And there was no forgiveness for me.

Nothing comes from nowhere, and it is the immutable truth. 
The tactile sensations of my maiden getting high in the stoker-house of the construction battalion established an inextricable link between being on high and getting smashed in the brains. 
Subsequently, the rigor of the interdependence was smoothed out, but the buzz continued to flow in.
Which gives rise to a question: if not me, then who gets the smash in the brains?

By the end of the five-year-plus period there came the answer.
The Khmer Rouge troops, when seizing another village, killed its inhabitants, the same Cambodians as themselves.
To save the ammo, they were killing them with striking bamboo sticks against their skulls.
Then they turned the bodies on their backs and photographed dead faces, like for a passport.
In those pictures, the right eye is half closed and the left one bulging out. 
I saw them.
Multiple rows of those pictures—dead people with feline faces—were regularly placed in the central newspapers.
They looked like some different non-human race, them those people with as if skinned faces.
I had what to feel guilty about.
Of course, after the events accompanying my first flight to Odessa, the peasants' brains were being smashed out not for me anymore, which did not stop the show so that someone else would get a kick. 
