
In Odessa, I found myself in the midst of a universal battle of the unknown who against whoever else. 
In the course of inconceivable vicissitudes, I became a somewho’s ally, making enemies with whoever else, still remaining in the complete dark as to who is who?
Though one thing was clear – those, with whom by the will of the fate I happened to be on the different sides of the barricades, would not fail to track me down and square the accounts. 
It’s no coincidence, that while I was getting off the Kiev-Moscow train in Nezhin a window in one of its cars opened and a glassy-eyed (apparently from the monad of the chief engineer) spit out a long stream of saliva on the platform.
That undoubtedly was a mark for other militants from their dark legion where to pick up my further trail from and trace my subsequent movements up to Konotop.
And here they would easily and inevitably discover the hemp plantation at the end of the garden of my parents’ hutta in the Settlement.
With incalculable and unimaginable consequences of the most horrible nature.

My duty before the allies and those not still finished off peasant in squalid villages in humid depths of jungles of southeast Asia prompted the only right decision…)

In the shed at the Decemberists 13, I took the bayonet type spade and went to the plantation on the farthest bed.

They stood proud of their almost three-meter height. 
Issuing the piercing rich aroma.

(…forgive me, I know you want to live, forgive that I was late for that train to Odessa, and now I have to do what I have to, forgive me…)

And they were falling—one after another, one next to another, one on top of the other—from the bayonet strikes piercing deep, separating the roots, cutting the life off... 

I stacked them in a high pile, went back to the shed and returned with a canister of gasoline.
A crackling fire rose up, a thick white smoke floated.
Alarmed by auntie Zina, my mother hurried to the garden.
‘Seryozha!.. What are you… Why?. How is it?..' 
‘So it is necessary.’
She left and my brother Sasha came instead.
‘Seryoga, what are you doing?' 
‘So it’s necessary.’
My brother always believed that I knew what I was doing even when I did not know it myself. 
He stopped asking me, but just stood there and we both looked at the fire turning the dense green of the dumped on a pile trunks and branches into black charred sticks and fine ash, brittle and white…

I arrived at Odessa in the dark and managed on the 6.00 bus from the New Bazaar.
Outside the city, an irresistible drowsiness overcame me and I missed the stop and only woke up after three hundred meters later.
At my request, the driver stopped the bus at the top of the climb and I crossed the forest belt.

In the garden of the outermost cottage amid the thinning twilight of the last night, an elderly mujik in his underwear and a woman in a white nightgown swept, for some reason, the beds with brooms. 
They moved in a strange way, like robots.
The mujik’s eyes were filmed with the glassines.
I did not see the woman’s eyes though, she was careful to keep them turned away.
Rather an incomprehensible view for so early an hour, but I could hardly be surprised at anything already.

In my four-day absence, they did not bring any asphalt. 
The worn-out pink painted plaster of the hostel building was for some reasons spattered with blue splashes and dispersed lines like to camouflage.
But why blue?

I got in a rut at the mine.
The weather changed because one day coming back from Odessa I found that in my pocket remained just one three-kopeck coin of greenish old copper. 
‘That’s not money,’ thought I to myself and threw the coin back over my shoulder between the trees of the forest belt.
For exactly three days thereafter the cold wind blew from the sea, refuting my dismissive opinion of the three kopecks and driving home to me the meaning of the expression ‘to throw money to the wind’.

The single electrician died on the road from Chabanka before reaching the hostel. 
They found him three days later.
I always knew that was a dangerous stretch of the road.
In summer, there were constantly flying fluffy spherical balls like to sea mines, but white and smaller, of course.
Probably, one of them had scraped the defunct when he was not quick enough to dodge.

They buried him in the village cemetery, on the cliff between the highway and the sea.
Kapitonovich was carrying a wooden cross ahead of the coffin, like a banner, but he himself had a sash of a long narrow towel like a matchmaker at a wedding.
Instead of pinning a handkerchief up the sleeve as at Konotop funerals.
What else could one expect of them?
They heard the song but got the wrong sow by the ear. 

In the father's pea-jacket with yellow buttons, I presented a colorful figure, like, a seaman from the black-and-white movie ‘We are from Krondstadt', but I also helped to fill up the grave. 
Then we were taken back to the hostel by a bus.
The women from the mine office in the pit prepared the wake feast from their home supplies. 
I wolfed away no less than at the Tshombe’s field camp.

The repaired radio set was brought back to the hostel and I had to move into the room of the diseased electrician. 
Soon Vasya, a new fastener, joined me there.
At first, I doubted his sex, when accidentally noticed red-brown stains on his bed sheets, as if from menstruation.
He started to explain that they were from a tomato that rolled under his blanket and he kicked it to a squash in sleep, although I hadn't been asking anything.
That hostel's just another Bellamy Isle with all around reading your thoughts before you had the time to finish them. 
However, what simple explanations could sometimes have incomprehensible, at first glance, facts.

Autumn came into its own.
I inserted glass into the window frame of one room in our would-be flat, however, they still had brought no asphalt.

And so it went its everyday way until the moment when the chief engineer came from Vapnyarka and said I was announced wanted at the all-Union scale and the mining management received a letter from the NGPI with accusations of sheltering a runaway from working off at the place of his appointment.
‘So, write the application.’
‘Which application?’
'To be fired at your own volition.’
‘I have not such wish.’
‘We cannot keep you here after that letter.’

As I persistently negated any wish to leave, a compromise was found, on the basis of one of many articles in the code of labor legislation, ‘dismissal by agreement of the parties’.
Thus, instead of the chosen, I became just a party. 

In the end, I had a parting walk around Odessa in the sheepskin coat open wide, like a soldier from the Peasant Army of Makhno, and in rubber boots bravely splashing across the puddles from the recent heavy rains.

Then in the hostel, I packed them in a bale with the rest of my clothes and the tools I had already started to acquire one by one – a hammer, an ax, a saw, an iron, an electric boiler, and a white enamel kettle. 

When I bought the kettle from Odessa I had to sing songs all the way from New Dophinovka to the hostel so that it would not get too spooked. 
It was very late, and the night was too dark, as in the abandoned shafts without the flashlight. 
I had to fit from memory into the bends of the country road groping for it with my feet.

I took the bale to the station to send it by train.
Then I returned to the hostel where a recently bought briefcase and sports bag Aerobica were sitting together with the guitar before going to the airport next morning.

Slavik Aksyanov dropped into our room.
We ate a whole pan of fried potatoes under ‘The Bolero' by Ravel from Vasya's receiver. 
I told Slavik to fix the door to the toilet booth above the sea inlet.
It was kicking back in the tall grass, I had seen it there.
He swore to do my last request.
However, just in case, I threatened that if he did not, I would haunt him like the ghost of Hamlet's father. 
A genuine fright flashed in his eyes.
Who would have ever imagined that even they were afraid of spooks! 

Eera told that they sent a letter from Transcarpathia to the institute informing about my absence from the appointed school.
Gaina Mikhailovna was summoned to Rector, who demanded to disclose my current location. 
After Rector declared that in summer he had met me in Odessa, she was forced to give away my affiliation with the mine. 
Now she was going to have troubles at work and my diploma would be taken away unless the Republican Ministry of Education annulled my appointment.

I had to urgently go to Kiev, as far as metro station named after Karl Marx and up the street starting from the October Revolution Square to a gray-stone building in a row of similar to it, yet different to them by its sign of Ministry of Education, and up the white steps of polished marble to a tall leather-lined door on the second floor.
The head of the department in charge of shirkers, named Baranov, looked five years older than me and superbly refined with the adequate chiseling, grinding and polishing as required by his position.

The only chink in his armor was the lone hair on the shoulder of his jacket over a thin woolen waistcoat, with a glimpse of the striped necktie over finely crisscrossed shirt – impierceable coat of mail. 
He trotted it out that our state for four years bore expenses to give me the free education and it was time to compensate by honest work in Transcarpathia or say goodbye to my diploma. 

My defense was built on my passionate desire to work in the field of enlightenment of the younger generations and nowhere else but on the slopes of the Carpathian Mountains, yet how about my family? 
He encouraged me to take you and Eera over there.
And what about the second, or rather, first of my daughters?
The presence of Lenochka was a surprise for him.
By the force of inertia, he suggested sending her together with everybody else. 
I had to show my passport that she was a product of my previous marriage and to confess bitterly to the lack of information as to her mother's whereabouts. 
That was the checkmate.
Grandmaster Baranov had not been trained to parry such moves and, having got to Zugzwang, admitted that I had a really swirly plot.
I would get a free diploma, that is the cancellation of my obligations to return my debt to the state by honest work at the place I was appointed to, if I presented the reference from Head of Street Committee, that Lenochka did live at 13 Decemberists, Konotop City. 

Meanwhile, the bale sent from Odessa arrived in Nezhin. 
The tools did not impress my father-in-law but he got delighted with a teapot strainer.
It was his long-term dream to have such a one, only you could not find it in stores even for ready money. 

Eera and I started discussing at which of the construction enterprises of Nezhin should I apply for a job to get an apartment as soon as possible when she suddenly said that I needed to be checked.
So advised her mother.
I was a little surprised because of a medical check being the must when you applied for a job even without her mother advice. 

Well, I had to understand that there was a need for special examination, to check if I was normal, see?
Certain traits in my behavior instilled some fears and threatened to disrepute the otherwise respectable family of Eera’s parents in the public eye.

For instance, recently I had a walk in torn shoes, and I also collected every mote of dust around your baby carriage, and any question, even of the most basic nature, caused me to think too long before to answer it, and, when she was in the hospital, I came home in the middle of the night and declared that the rain was warm.
In addition, Eera was shocked by the news from Konotop about my fanatical autodafe of the hemp plantation, which, though not included in the list of deviations, spoke volumes. 

I had no counter-arguments, she was right on all the points. 
Shortly before that talk, on a clear peaceful autumn day, I went out for a walk wearing my shoes. 
They were not torn, of course, but fairly worn-out along the sidewalks of Odessa and country roads in the adjacent Komintern district. 

The walk inspired an elegiac mood. 
I remembered the distant galaxies on the smooth sea surface under the steep cliffs near Vapnyarka, the endlessly long street of Kotovsky's Road, and the ridiculously short one of Sholem Aleichem walked along in the same brown leather shoes with longitudinal incut pieces in their toe caps. 
They were sort of a spaceship returned from an expedition to the other end of the universe – still alive, but not fashionable… 

When I was kicking them off in the hallway, Gaina Mikhailovna remarked that it was time to use some warmer footwear.
I felt really pleased with such caring attentiveness from my mother-in-law. 

I could not deny my being slow in answering questions.
Each of them fired up a rumbling computer in my mind (although I did not know then even the word ‘computer') to assess the combinatorial variations of all the possible responses and choose such one from them that would not lose its validity even in the most incalculable future. 

(...an idiot!
All that, in fact, was required:
‘A? Yes...’…)

As for the entrenched defense around your carriage, I have already mentioned it.

Yet, at that time I never thought of debating or proving anything—especially since I had no excuses for the warm rain and the burnt down hemp—so I just went where Eera told me to go with her.

That was a corridor on the second floor of an unfamiliar building with wide floorboards painted red.

The place was rather crowded.
There hanged a sheet of Whatman paper with a picture executed with crayons in the technique of ‘The Merry Pictures' magazine where a kettle addressed the washcloth with the question: 
‘Why did you tell the saucer I was a colander?’
Most likely a gift from some art lover patronizing the institution.

The picture was contemplated joyfully by a young man in the army officer pea-jacket without any insignia.
He wore his forage cap tilted a sliver of a notch on a screwballish side.

Eera entered one of the offices to state complaints.
Then they called me in but no conversation followed.
The doctor, addressing Eera, announced he was not competent for the like cases and I should be examined in Chernigov.

(...exactly as my father used to say:
‘They are sitting there, getting their salary but when you turn to them – “I’m not Copenhagen!” is all they say!..)

The Chernigov psychiatric hospital was located four kilometers from the city. 
The bus stop was named exactly same way: ‘The 4th kilometer’.
Its vast territory was surrounded by a high concrete wall with the gate conveniently not far from the stop.
It was a large complex of buildings in the modern huge-block architectural style which could adorn the city were it no so far away.

We went into the yard of red-tiled buildings of various height; some of them were bridged with indoor galleries or connected with lower structures.
Eera was obviously oppressed by that Bau Stile. 
To tell the truth, I also was always in favor of the works by architect Corbusier.

I escorted dejectedly silent Eera to the needed building.
We were accepted in a small one-window office by a dark-haired woman in a white robe named Tamara… er… Tamara… well, I am sorry, her patronymic has escaped my mind.

At the desk by the window, there sat a sportsman looking man also in white.
When I was asked by Tamara about my preferences in music, he started prompting:
‘Variety it is!’
I realized that he was there not just to ensure Tamara’s security if I were a violently deviated case.
So I had to honestly admit there were more than one – Ella Fitzgerald and Johann Sebastian Bach.
Because I do not drive a fool about the things that really matter.

Tamara told Eera that deviations of my kind were not dangerous, however, if so was Eera’s wish and if I did not mind, then they would keep me for some more close observation.

I did not mind, only warned that on Saturday it was my brother’s wedding to which Eera and I had been invited and, with Tamara’s permission, I would come back to the 4th kilometer on Monday.
Upon my word of honor.

Tamara concurred and saw us out into the corridor. 
From behind the glass door on its end, there came a muffled noise of a multitude of people. 

By that time my brother Sasha had already moved from PMS to KhAZ and was working on some sophisticated milling-grinding machine. 

The KhAZ was not the KhAZ itself, but only a branch of the Kharkov Aviation Plant.
They did not assemble any planes at the branch, but produced spare parts of most different configurations, packed them in boxes and sent to KhAZ or to its other branches in some other cities.

In Konotop the KhAZ branch was named, for shortness, just KhAZ and everybody was eager to get a job there because of high wages.
Sasha earned 200 rubles a month!
The rest of the workers got lower payment because there was just one machine of so high high-precision.

Another advantage of KhAZ was its location in the Settlement, you could come home for the midday break and have your havvage.
Unfortunately, there was a drawback too, KhAZ made you work longer than just eight hours a day. 

No, there were no labor legislation violations.
Sasha left his working place at five sharp, but his work overtook him even at home. 
He complained to me that even watching football on TV, he contemplated his working plans for the next day: which spare parts to work on in the morning, and which after the midday break.
I felt sorry for my brother, but there was nothing I could help him with.

In the Settlement, earning 200 rubles a month, you could start up a family of your own without hesitations.
Sasha’s chosen one, Lyuda, worked at ‘The Optics’ store in the Zelenchuk area and she was also from the Settlement.
Besides, she was a really enviable bride having two huttas, or rather, each of her estranged, but not divorced parents had a separate one.
Which guaranteed a young family immediate solving the problem of housing one way or the other.
Who would not choose to live in clover?
So my brother became an Acceptee.

Eera planned to buy bed linen as the wedding present, but all the traces of such goods had long disappeared from the stores.
It was explained by the fact that the following year Moscow was going to host the World Olympics and the mentioned commodity would be needed for doing beds in the Olympic Village. 

(...in a forward flashing, I can tell that two years later bedding remained a sharp deficit.
I cannot imagine what those guest sportspersons were doing with it in the Olympic Village…)

So, as the wedding present Eera bought a nice jug of red transparent glass, wisely reasoning, that the bed sheets would wear out very quickly but the jug—if not broken—could stand in the cupboard until the golden anniversary.

Since the wedding happened to coincide with our mother birthday, I wanted to present her with flowers. 

Gaina Mikhailovna insisted that no flowers could be bought on November 24, but I went to the bazaar all the same.

On the bridge over the Oster, I saw a man holding a bouquet in his hands in a company of two ladies. 
They were just standing there looking anything but traders.
However, I felt their presence on the bridge was no accident, came up and asked if he would sell me the flowers.

My mother-in-law’s bewilderment had no limits, but I knew that somewhere around Odessa or in the worlds parallel to it I had done something right which was not forgotten by the grateful allies.

We went to Konotop by 15.15 local train.
The wedding party took place in a three-room hutta on Sosnowska Street in the Settlement.
The flowers caused surprise even there.
The surprise became more when I gave them not to the bride.
Then Sasha remembered what day it was and assured the guests it was okay.

The following was a traditional Settlement wedding of an Acceptee.
The only difference that at the party I kicked off smoking.
It happened when a neighbor at the table started to convince me of the impossibility of giving up the habit especially at a party of any kind. 
I put out the lighted cigarette and that was all there to it.

(...I am a non-smoker even now…)

The next morning at 13 Decemberists, Eera announced my intended trip to the 4th kilometer by Chernigov. 
There followed a stormy exchange of views with my parents.
They opposed the very idea of the trip and demanded cancellation of it.
No matter how hard I tried, they could not understand that I had promised to be there on Monday.
How to survive in a world where you could not rely even on your own word?

Eventually, Eera took sides with my parents and they continued convincing me together.
Only Lenochka was silent sitting in the corner of the sofa.

‘What? Educated him for your own misery?’ my father reproached my mother.
Then he turned to me.
‘We've done all that we could for you. Now it's your turn. Do as we ask you. Or we're not what you wanted? What are our wrongs? Tell it!' 
‘Okay, I will!' answered I and tapped my fist on the top of the table. ‘Why did you stop writing poetry?' 
There was a sharp change in my father’s attitude.
He was turning his eyes in embarrassment from his wife and daughter-in-law.
Even in the deep wrinkles on his forehead, there was an unseen before shyness. 
‘Well… I was young… it was the war then...’

(...here’s life, huh?
You start to drive a fool and unexpectedly run across a frank confession… 
By now he gave up the poetry completely.
He switched over to oratory.
In long winter evenings, he puts his felt boots on and goes out to the meeting of neighbors of his age under the lamp on the post nearby the Kolesnikov's hutta. 
And there they stand on the trampled snow, discussing the news from yesterday’s news program ‘Time’, hotly debating whether Muammar Gaddafi’s a manly man or the same clown as Yasser Arafat?..)

As a compromise, they decided that before leaving for Chernigov I would go with my mother to a local psychiatrist Tarasenko from whom (here my father narrowed his eyes) no one could get hooked off. 

Then I escorted Eera to the station and all the way there she tried to persuade me not to go to the 4th kilometer.
But my word to Tamara had been spoken and past recalling.

In the light large building of the Konotop Medical Center, not far from the Avanguard stadium, people were crowding next to each door and only the door to the office of Tarasenko the psychiatrist had no one around.
When my mother and I entered his office, Tarasenko explained the phenomenon by the low awareness of the population. 
There, overseas, every fourth citizen visited a psychiatrist.

Tarasenko's office was equipped with his assistant nurse and the standard medical office's furniture. 
However, the furniture was arranged very strangely. 
The oddity was created by the positioning of the desk. 
Besides being put in the center of the room, it was also turned the wrong way, with its drawers to the door.
I was asked to sit down at the desk.
My mother sat on a chair by the wall and the medical team of two stood on either side of the desk.

I did not like this disposition intended to inflate my megalomania—you sit there like Chairman Mao and those in white are standing around as an errand-boy with an errand-girl.
So, I pushed the chair a bit back from the desk, turned it 90 degrees and, stretching my legs out, put one foot on the other in the posture of a kicking off cowboy. 

And now Tarasenko and his partner rushed to pull and slam back the desk drawers with bang and crash. 
Getting to so violent a company I, naturally, pulled my legs back but kept sitting, also I pricked my ears up. 
What’s on?

Making sure that I hadn't jumped out of the door, neither tried to climb the window blinds, Tarasenko stopped the test and announced that I was as healthy as a bull. 
‘Tell it to him!’ exclaimed my mother, sobbing.
‘He wants to go to the psychiatric hospital in Chernigov!’
‘What for?’
‘His wife has sent him there!’
‘Is she a doctor?’
‘No!’
‘Why then? People can send you anywhere. Is he her slave, or what?’
‘Yes! Yes! He’s a slave!’

(...look here, Joseph Yakovlevich, aka the Beautiful, you was sold into slavery by your brothers, okay? 
How would you like it being sold by your own mother?..)

Tarasenko once again ordered me, already as a slave, not to go anywhere and I together with my mother left his office.

On the way to the tram stop, my mother asked:
‘Now, you see? Got convinced?’
‘It does not change anything.’
‘If they do anything to you, I’ll kill her!’ said my mother with a sob.
‘Mom,’ said I, ‘what kind of book have you recently read?’
Of course, I knew perfectly well that my mother stopped reading books a long time ago, but you have to give some response to maintain a conversation.
