
Because of the check with submitting me into slavery and inconsistencies in the train traffic timetables, I reached the 4th kilometer by Chernigov late in the evening.
However, the stipulated Monday was not over yet and I started to knock at the iron gate rising discontent yells from the securities in the check entrance house. 
They switched on the light and asked what was my wish.
Tamara's name became the password. 

Two more orderlies in blue flannel gowns came up and took me to the waiting room.
There I gave up my clothes and received pajamas in exchange and a pair of army kirza boots.
The left boot was my size, but the right one squeezed the foot mercilessly.
Probably, that was a retaliation for disturbing them at so late an hour.

Then through the cold darkness, I was taken to the fifth unit and handed over to the paramedic on duty. 
He led me into a wide empty corridor dimly lit, because of the late hour, with a pair of shaded lamps on the wall reflected in the dark glass of a distant window in the opposite end of the corridor. 
Glazed doors to the wardrooms were lined along the left wall. 

The paramedic escorted me into one of the wardrooms, pointed at a free bed and went out. 
In the dim light through the glass of the door, I could make out half a dozen of bed laid with wrapped up figures and ghostly nightstands in between. 
I undressed and lay down suppressing involuntary fear.

Apparently, so late addition made the population of the ward to hide away under their blankets, but, gradually, they thawed out.
Someone invisible asked me from out of the corner if it was me.
They hush-hashed at him and he fell silent.

I refrained from answering.
Through the glass door, there came a faraway cry from down the corridor and cut off too. 
I lay—a wrapped up figure as everyone else—rejoicing that I still managed to do it on Monday, and felt the upsurging alertness because I understood who I was among. 
‘So what, Kostya, would you like some home-made sausage now?’ asked one of the invisible figures of his invisible partner.
I was tickled with irresistible laughter.
How quickly they had figured me out!.
 
When Eera and I were leaving Chernigov after our joint visit to the 4th kilometer, Eera bought a coil of home-made sausage at the station.
It was really delicious.

Now, the brainstorming team in the darkness entered an expert discussion of that very sausage and I, amused by their getting on track so casually, tried to choke the laughter and snuffle it away through the nostrils biting the corner of my pillowcase so that they would not take me for a psycho. 
At some point, I could not hide it anymore and they froze in a frightened silence... 

The morning began with the shuffling of slippers in the wide corridor.
With a yoke from a waffle tower around my neck, I went out in kirza boots and, following the mainstream of the traffic found the washroom and toilet. 
Then there was a usual havvage for breakfast.

When doctors arrived from the city, Tamara looked into the huge corridor and called me by my last name.
I approached her with apologies for being late on Monday.
She forgave me and returned to her parts.

The huge corridor society was populous, diversified and in a state of noisy Brownian movement.
Absolutely unsystematic.
Apart from me, only one individual with his hair closely cropped in zek style wore boots.
He, for the most part, lay on the floor tiles around the white radiators of central heating under the window sill in the far end of the corridor.
Time and again he was pressing himself against the other patient’s backside, who also was lying there.
The addressed one silently pushed him away with a languid motion of a hand.

The mobile part of the crowd roamed around in their slippers, immersed in their individual inner worlds and occasionally emerged from there with some incomprehensible exclamations.
A cripple on a low trolley navigated the stream of their wandering legs propelling himself with his hands pushes against the floor.
He obviously supervised some part of the society capable of understanding instructions and orders and served a hub for their hangout in the style of a black market.

A pair of Mssrs. Pretty-Guys kept together.
The dark-haired one showed himself off as the master-thief in their milieu of two.

A young man of Central Asian appearance invited me to play checkers at a table in the far corner. 
Every eye in his face moved independently from the other, as happens when the brain hemispheres do not interfere in the sovereign internal affairs of the neighbor and each one controls their own eye.

The guy obviously could not play checkers and when there remained just one piece of his on the board I announced the draw and did not play anymore. 

And I did not play cards with the Mssrs. Pretty-Guys.

In the other end of the corridor by the window between the locked door to the courtyard and the glazed door to the passage with medical offices, a white figure of a nurse sat in a chair. 
She never intervened with anything.
She rose from her throne only after the midday havvage to stately walk along with the gurney arrived from the passage to the center of the corridor.

‘Medication!’ sounded joyful cries from different parts of the crowd.
They rushed to form a cluster around the movable table, grabbing up their favorites from the pills of different color and size scattered over the oil-clothed top. 

Soon after some glassy-eyed appeared in the crowd.
The exchange transactions at the black market grew more animated.

To pass the time I followed the example of Lenin and Dean Reed measuring their cells with steps from end to end.
I was lucky to have much more space and orbited the huge corridor in a swaying ellipse from the window in one end to the window by the locked door in the other.
Being not alone in the space I was careful to avoid collisions, especially since I walked at a rapid pace.
Some in the crowd paid attention.

The blonde one from Mssrs. Pretty-Guys started up the Indian drums beat against the cover of a thick book, that he constantly kept in his armpit, accentuating the footfalls of my boots.
‘Why are you driving a fool? You need it?’ shouted the dark-haired one in my wake.
‘Try it yourself, you’ll get high!’ I shouted back, scudding to the other end.

One of the activists in the Brownian movement by the walls suddenly got it.
He issued a happy scream and also started running regular ellipses of an orbit, though not along, but across the corridor.

‘Ogoltsoff infected Baranov!' squeaked some rat from the crowd to the queen in her chair. 
But she did not intervene in anything.
 
Walking was painful because the right boot was borrowed from the torture kit of the Inquisition – a ‘Spanish boot' two sizes smaller than mine. 
I managed to withstand just one day and on the second one decided that was enough for playing Andersen's Mermaid and turned to the nurse with the complaint. 
She gave me a pair of slippers, like on the rest of the patients only more worn-out.
Yet orbiting became painless.

One weakness breeds another.
You start to fix one unbearable sore and there crop up a pack of others.
The button on the pajama pants belt kept slipping out of its too wide slit.
I grew tired of living with my hand clutching pants top for them not to fall down. 
And again I had to bring the nurse out of her non-involvement lethargy with the request for a needle and a thread. 

No sooner had the repair been over than another nurse appeared from the medical offices' passage and called the roll of those starting to the club. 
My name was there too.

For a considerable stretch of time, our caravan of the twelve in pajamas went after the nurse in white yet the concluding patient in our single file was in a black padded jacket of a workman. 

Passing the stairs we entered the long indoor gallery bridging to another building.
Outside the windows stretched withered fields with a distant row of black-and-yellow arrow-shields indicating the direction towards the out-of-sight airfield. 
On the windowsills there stood pots with cacti accompanied with the handwritten instruction for those meek of heart and ignorant of agriculture:
‘Do not water cacti!’

It turned out to be a classically standard club with the stage in front of the hall of rows of seats and the visual agitation posters on the walls:
‘Bread is the head of anything else!’
‘The economy should be economical!’
‘If there is bread, there will be a song!' 
And the citations printed in smaller typesets.

The workman from the end of our file pulled up at the nearest to the entrance citation, and studied it unswervingly and only at times scratched the cap upon his head for which purpose he had to free his hands locked in their zek style clasp on his back. 

I sat down in the last row of seats.
The lamps above the stage lit up and a man in a white robe came on it with a displeased countenance and accordion.
Two more nurses brought in another caravan – a dozen of women in gray robes over the linen of their underwear.
Two or three of them proceeded to seats in the middle of the hall and were immediately joined by Mssrs. Pretty-Guys.

The accordionist started to play for the dancers in the passage between the stage and the front row of seats.
A woman of about forty swiftly paced along the central aisle carrying her sweet smile to the last row and invited me for the white dance.
‘Sorry, I'm no good at the waltz.' 
She went away with her face dropped down.
A loss. A loss.

Despite the purpose of the Strauss's ‘The Danube Waves’ no one was waltzing but just hugging each other in pairs.
Two pairs climbed onto the stage.
In one of them, there was the young man with asynchronous eyes. 
But now both of them were fixed on the tall soft fluff of the gray mohair hat of his partner – a nurse in a white medical coat.
Who of them invited who?

The ladies were first to be taken away, then our caravan started.
The workman broke away from the citation poster and took his concluding place in the file without unclasping his eternal zek hand-hitch.

Besides orbiting the corridor and the visit to a ball in the club, I was also reading.
I asked the blonde one from Mssrs. Pretty-Guys to lend me the book from his armpit which he at times used as a drum, and he willingly concurred.

It turned out to be a book of stories by Tamaz Chiladze translated from Georgian.
I liked them, but in original they, probably, were better.

On the third day, I was sitting by the window next to the locked door to the yard where the first snow was descending in slow quiet flakes. 
I looked at it and read the once read ‘The Judge and Executioner' by Durrenmatt. 
Behind me, all this modern world was romping and fussing and rumbling and mumbling and stumbling in the cross-section reflection by the fifth unit of the fourth kilometer.
I had already been fed up with it.

But I did not have time to finish reading, there was a knock on the window glass from outside.
On the thin soft snow cover, Eera stood and smiled at me. 
Silent snowflakes slowly swirled around her face.
So beautiful.

The nurse brought my clothes and I entered the wardroom to change.
When I returned to the corridor that particles of society who retained a more close connection with now and here were astounded by my leaving them so soon. 
Someone, hiding his identity behind the Brownian movement, shouted angrily that it’s not right to let me out, but I’m sure it was not Baranov because he’s a cheerful guy.

Excited by the freedom at hand, I took a step forward and shouted out that I was grateful to everyone for everything and I promise to remember.
In response, a spontaneous rally broke out, but I already stepped out in the offices’ passage.

On the way to Tamara's, I saw in one of the rooms a lonely old woman in a dressing gown and a head kerchief. 
Crawling on all fours on the floor, she was lining large blocks, the size of a brick, in two rows.

Tamara told Eera that my treatment had not started yet, but as she was insisting so much then let her take me and not be too worried, the deviations of the sort I had were a commonplace thing among Ph.D. degree people. 
That was her way of consoling Eera.

(...that trap did not work for me, by that time I had already found an effective way of keeping my megalomania in check, but Eera seemed to have believed her.
In any case, two years later she gave me for the birthday present a book by Plekhanov, that guy who brought Marxism to Russia. 
On the back of its hardcover, she wished me to become as clever as he was because she was waiting for that. 
So, she waited at least two years though Freud was talking of just one and a half…)

Turning to me, Tamara prescribed a means of turning back to myself – I should watch the news program ‘Time’ every evening.

In the following several years I firmly kept to her prescription and could already with an accuracy of three days predict a plane crash or arrival of the delegation of the Communist Party of Paraguay in Moscow with a brief working visit.
Then I got tired of it and stopped watching TV justifying myself with the proverb that the humpback would be straightened with his grave and that time I’d be already like everyone else – clean of my leopard spots.

(...yet how beautiful this world is when you look at its roots!

“...the symposium was held under the auspices of UNESCO...”

When you learn that ‘aegis' means a goatskin, and ‘symposium' corresponds to a collective drinking bout, then you get it with an especially acute awareness that in the group jag under the goatskins the prostitute of Unesca is most welcome…) 

‘See how perfect this world is,
Have a look!
Ah, how perfect this world i-i-is!..’


