~~~ The Parade of Planets ~~~

On the day D, aka my departure, everything was by a hairbreadth from the fall, more precisely, by the breadth of a cobweb thread.
I noticed that when I went out to the entrance vestibule to spark.
In the apartment, I did not smoke at all.
That cobweb thread hanging from the upper crossbar of the cracked entrance door frame was tightly strung with the weight of burned match dangling from its end.
How long would it last?

It was I who always stuffed burned matches in the gap above the frame because there was not a trash bin in the entrance vestibule.
After Tonya’s toddler son exposed my connection with hemp I did not care what the passers-by would scent in my smoke floating in the vestibule.
Would the cobweb thread hold on until I was away?

I looked out of the vestibule shade into the yard.
In the heat-melted sky, a squadron of black ravens coasted lowly.
They did not move their wings—too hot for the effort—heading to the northeast, even the feathers at their wing-tips held apart so as to catch the hot breeze.
Would I get through?.

Eera saw me to the train to Kiev.
When we were getting on a bus, Alla Pugacheva sobbed from a balcony in the neighboring five-story block her latest hit after me:

‘Please, come back for at least a day!..’

I did not have much luggage – a briefcase with a book of stories by W. S. Maugham in English (soft pink cover, Moscow publishing house ‘The Enlightment’), the Hornby’s Learners’ Dictionary, a 12-leaf copy-book with a stub of translation of ‘The Rain’ story by Maugham (4 pages of a rough pencil draft with multiple corrections), the employment history book (the first entry made on September 13, 1971, at Konotop Locomotive and Car Repair Plant), the passport, the military ID, and shaving accessories.
And also a blue sports bag with a shoulder strap containing a change of underpants, a pair of shirts, jeans, and the geologist jacket sewn by my mother of green tarpaulin.

In the local train, I threw them onto the car-long rack of thin tubes above the windows and went back to the platform.
Eera was nervous that the doors would slam shut and the train leave without me.
I climbed one step to the car vestibule and stood there, grabbing the nickel-plated vertical railing.
‘I left something on the windowsill, let it be there till I’m back.’
‘What’s that?’
‘You’ll see. I’ll be back exactly in a month.’
‘When there, call at once!’
It was the last car of the train.

An old woman ran up along the platform.
She asked about something but I neither listened nor wanted to, I was looking at Eera until the speakers in the car shouted ‘Beware! The doors are closing!’
And they cut me off her.
The electric train pulled and, gaining the speed, rumbled along the rails in the direction of Kiev...

The night before, I went out shopping together with Eera.
The department store had been locked already, but a glassed stall by its side was still open.
From the middle-aged gypsy woman inside of it, I bought a new manual razor machine, a shaving brush, a standup mirror, and two handkerchiefs.
Each of them had a series of thin blue wavy lines printed on the field with a thin circular frame in the center.
They were different only by the pictures inside those frames – a small sailing boat in one, a neat blue anchor in the other.

In my pocket I was carrying away the handkerchief with the sailing boat, the one with the anchor was left on the windowsill.
Coming back, I would put their circles to each other, the boat to the anchor.
It would be the ritual of return.

And late at night Gaina Mikhailovna suddenly grew anxious and started to tell there was no need to go anywhere and it was still possible to return the ticket Kiev-Odessa to the preliminary ticket office.
I thought I was going to get mad – what ticket return, on earth?

Eera and Tonya also joined the conversation, only the father-in-law was out, urgently called to the Bakery Plant.
Staring at the table oilcloth, the mother-in-law was mumbling about the too difficult situation, so that even Ivan couldn’t get through.

A week before, Ivan, Tonya’s husband left for Transcarpathia, but a day later, without ever reaching there, he returned from Kiev—I couldn’t get it why—and was presently sitting in the other bedroom with their children.

By that time, I had already realized, that the world was in the state of constant wrangling, the unceasing battle went on – but who against who?
And, naturally, all that was hidden under the surface layer of the common everyday life.
However, I was already capable of catching glimpses of certain inconsistencies, secret signs, the instances of people letting out things surpassing limits of the customary life.
Was I sure they were exactly people?
Well, I did not have another name for them.

Letting out? What namely? What about?
About things that did not belong to the life we were accustomed to.
… Ivan was repealed on his emissary mission… unable to get through… and whose side are you on?.. the fire at the Bakery Plant, an episode in the universal battle… 
Who’s for who? Who’s against who?.

A thunderstorm broke behind the black window in the living room.
The ramble of falling water cut through with the thunderclaps. 
The flicker of lightning flashes.
A pillar of blinding light struck the transformer box in the yard.
The darkness reigned around.

Tonya went to her bedroom to calm the children and Ivan down.
She came back with a burning candle.

In its feeble light, I saw that I was talking to Mothers. 
Those very Mothers so cautiously and in the cut-and-run manner mentioned by Goethe.
Three Mothers they were: the old, but powerful, the middle, and the beginner – Eera.
She was not my ally, she was one of them.
I needed to persuade them, otherwise, nothing would come out. 

With the storm raging outside the reflection of a blinking candle in the black glasses, I still managed to get their go-ahead.
In conclusion, the eldest said: 
‘If something would go awry… in a hopelessly extreme situation… turn to the very Head.' 

At night I saw a prophecy dream.
In the room with the half-translucent pale gray walls, I lay on a gurney, trying to hide from the cold fluorescent light flooding through everything.
A group of someones in white robes gathered around me.
The one standing behind my head said:
‘If not for the fat, it still might come out...’  

I knew that the one in the white who pronounced that was also me.
Throwing a furtive glance from under my half-closed eye-lid on my stomach upon the gurney, through the translucence of the skin I saw a thin yellowish layer, maybe the fat he was talking about…

I went out into the car vestibule and sparked.
In the sky behind the dusty glass of the automatic doors, a flock of seahorses floated with their tails rounded up under the bellies. 
Lined by their height, from the bigger to the smaller.
They were also fond of a system, like those white elephants.
The train hurriedly ran ahead but couldn’t escape from them…

A man entered the vestibule with a row of medals on his jacket.
A war veteran.
Here’s the one who once knew who’s for who, who’s against who.
We shot the breeze for a while.

At one of the stops, a man with a bundle of long thin planks stepped in from the platform. 
He carried his load between us and went on into the car.
The veteran, with a fright, popped up in his eyes, looked into the upper corner behind me.
I knew that there was nothing there, but since he saw it then there it was.
And I also went to the car under the rack carrying my things because Kiev was approaching our train... 

At the station, I took things to the cool and spacey underground checkroom hall. 
On coming back up to the surface of the square in front of the station, I found the passage in its right corner leading to the steep and long stair flights to the canteen once shown to me and Olga by Lekha Kuzko. 
At the bottom of the stairs, I sparked and went on, but had to stop smoking when a platoon of militiamen poured out of the canteen and marched towards me along the sidewalk. 
So I had to walk through their formation with a lit joint in my hand.

From the canteen, I returned to the station and took a walk-round. 
There were not so many glass-eyed as at the night round in the Nezhin station, probably, because of another time of the day.
Still, there were some and at my approach, they hurriedly pretended that they were there just so, as ordinary passengers. 

I went up to the third floor where there was the mother-and-child room and explained to the watchwoman that in a month I would be passing their station with my wife and baby-daughter and now dropped in to see the conditions.
Well, in general, rather a clean corridor, thank you. 

Near the toilet rooms on the first floor, a young militiaman with a black eye of deep purple color took pains to avoid any eye contact with me, although both of us knew that his black eye was a result of my walking through their formation and that he, who had suffered in the universal battle would not forgive me it.

Then I stood for a long stretch of time in the waiting hall on the second floor in front of the huge news stall desk with piles of various newspapers, magazines, postal envelopes.
But all that time I looked at just one postcard.
There was the bluest blue sky in its picture.
I had to wait a long time until there sounded footsteps behind me hardly audible in the joint buzz of the crowd in the hall.
I did not look back.
The footsteps stopped.
A copper coin the size of an eye iris fell on the blue of that postcard.
Only then I turned and went away without looking back – from that moment on no casual genes would be able to change the color of your eyes.

And only then it was that the station loudspeakers voice broke through to me:
‘The train Kiev-Odessa departs from the third platform.  We ask escorting citizens to leave the cars.’

...At those times even the bravest minds in the most rampant flights of their fantasies could not imagine or think about an installation of surveillance cameras in public places. 

Then what, under those times' conditions, could have been the reason for the incomprehensible scene that happened the same evening in the queue of passengers waiting at the bus-stop in front of the Kiev intercity bus station? 
There can be just one possible answer – the vigilance of a taxi driver.

(...here the word ‘reason’ is used in the customary meaning of this term at describing details of the surrounding reality by means of substitution it for traditionally kept and orthodoxly agreed upon cause-effect relationships.
However, I at that period was too muchly absorbed in tracing up the interrupted chain of transcendental symbols and signs of varying significance, being constantly discovered by me, in order to reach a new and higher level of understanding of the world and my role in it…)

So, back to the taxi driver in the parking lot by the steps to the underground checkroom hall at the Kiev railway station for trains of the long-distance destination.

At 17.06 a young man about twenty-five-or-seven years old, one-meter seventy-eight centimeters tall, with straight brown hair, and a trimmed mustache, rose from the passage. 
He wore a gray jacket and gray pants that did not match the jacket’s shade.
Noticeably upset about something he got into the taxi and suggested that the driver should go down to the underground hall instead of him and bring a briefcase and a bag from the indicated automatic storage cell, the code to which he would name.
The driver, naturally, refused.

The dark-haired individual fell into a reverie, twisting a burnt match in his right-hand fingers, then sighed, broke the match in his hand, asked to wait a bit and disappeared down the passage steps. 
Five minutes later he appeared again and asked to take him to the intercity bus station.

Upon arrival at the specified place, he paid, hung the bag on his left shoulder, gripped the briefcase handle with the same hand and slammed the door.
Then he, like, imperceptibly rubbed nickel-plated door handle with the hem of his jacket destroying, by all the canons of criminal films, his fingerprints.
After these manipulations, he disappeared into the entrance to the intercity bus station.

What else could the driver naturally do?
Of course, he naturally called the operative he was secretly collaborating with under the pseudonym of ‘Tractor’.

What was witnessed by the queue of passengers at the bus stop to which I joined coming back from the bus station building after a visit to the men’s toilet and a five-minute stop in the lobby to consider the multi-meter picture ‘Fly with the Aeroflot!’ depicting a happily smiling stewardess in the uniform jacket?

Nearby the stop, a freshly washed Zhiguli car pulled up abruptly.
A man in dark sunglasses got out of it, came up to me and, holding out the ignition key on a bunch with other different ones, said: 
‘Get in the car, we’ll go right now.’
I silently turned away.
The man proceeded to the bus station building.

Soon two young men emerged from behind the right corner of the building—one of them in a militiaman uniform, the other in plainclothes—and took the position on the right side of the queue. 
From behind the left corner, the same man in dark glasses came together with a short companion in a thick fabric cap. 
They stopped on the other side of the queue.
The man in the cap (an obvious wretch and tipsy as well) mingled with the lining passengers and approached me.

He started rubbing against me from behind.
The nearby passengers looked in bewilderment.
The disgusting scene was interrupted by the appearance of a bus with the inscription ‘Polyot’ on its side.

On the way to Borispol, I did not respond to the puzzled looks of the fellow travelers, returning with my mental gaze to what had not been recorded with the then-non-existent and therefore absent surveillance camera in the men's toilet room of the Kiev intercity bus station. 

I went up to the sloping trough of the common urinal and poured there the mustard-brown powder of all the dope I had by me.
Then I crumpled its packing sheet of paper and threw it to the trash-bin.
The way I was taught by the French criminal movies starring Belmonde.

(…which is the evidence that I can be programmed not only by means of a text but with the application of movies too. 
In all my life that followed, up to this moment in the night forest by the river of Varanda, I stayed completely abstinent…) 

At the airport in Borispol, I didn't use an automatic cell to keep my bag and briefcase but left them in a baggage room so that they could make sure there was no point in rubbing their wretch provocateurs against my ass. 
A ticket to Odessa for a plane flying from Moscow cost 17 rubles.
It did not exceed the amount of 20 rubles I had by me for living until the first advance payment at the construction sites of the new port city...

On arrival at Odessa I couldn’t see the airport in the dark and went by bus to the intercity bus station where all the ticket offices were already locked but the baggage room still operated and in the waiting rooms there were benches for overnight sitting.

Sure enough, I felt myself a winner because of I managed, despite everything, to break through Kiev. 

The light-headed delight with the success was assuring me of my complete invulnerability.

Return to the real state of things was not very pleasant when a scattered line of passengers slogged to the back door for the first early morning bus. 
I was sitting half-asleep in the incipient daylight, my head thrown, with the defiant insolence of the winner, back over the bench backrest, leaving my whole throat completely undefended.

The pain from the needle sting to the right from Adam's apple made me pinch the skin in the carotid artery area. 
Of course, there was no needle there but the feeling of a deeply stuck, or rather hurriedly pulled out needle stayed there.
The following half hour I winced and rubbed my throat skin.

At the ticket office they said me there were no runs to Yuzhny and to get there I heeded a local communication bus from the bus station 3 by the New Bazaar.

Having reached there and in front of bus station 3 schedules where the line ‘Yuzhy' repeated itself at different hours, I decided that I should take a walk before departure because—damn you, OMG!—it was Odessa-Mommy! 
I was in Odessa!
Wow!.

At the end of the small station-hall stood just a couple sections of automatic storage cells.
All their doors were locked except for one in the upper row of a section.
I put my thing inside, dialed a code, dropped 15 kopecks into the slot and slammed the door.
The lock did not work, that’s why the cell had remained vacant.
I took the documents from my briefcase and put them in the inside pocket of my jacket.
Then I quietly closed the door so that it would look as if locked.

On the crest of the rolling up wave of euphoria, I left the bus station to Odessa...

Not everyone has the chance to experience the state of complete happiness in their life.
I am from among luckier ones.
More than that, I can indicate the time and place of the absolute happiness I have experienced.
These are the few hours of my first walk in Odessa...

The streets I walked along were filled with a joyful glare of the sun. 
I was a part of everything around and everything was a part of me in that unfamiliar city where everyone tacitly recognized me and had been so long awaiting my coming. 
I felt what people were thinking and gave them mental responses.

Here comes a woman rejoicing in her own beauty.
Wow! That's a really good one! 
And she blooms up victoriously.
But I have Eera.
And the woman gets sad and dropping her head walks past.

To a middle-aged Caucasian looking with a ho-hum stare around I threw in the thought:
‘Eew, Javad, I still remember your blow with a dagger!’
With all of his boredom shed off at once, he sorrowfully sagged the shoulders and pulled at his mustache, stunned by a sudden memory of a treacherous attack from Javad of whom up to the present moment he had not had the slightest idea. 
Okay, let’s not think sad things!

A fast-moving flock of pioneers in scarlet neckties and white shirts shoots past.
They hurry to the celebration of my arrival to the city.

I enter a big bookstore and make my choice for future.
I communicate with the shop-assistants and buyers without ever opening my mouth.

I walk up the steps of the famous stair past the monument to Richelieu who never was a cardinal.

In the nearby green grove there are again pioneers, but another squad, too much, to my mind, carried away with watching the freight cars with goods for the port.
‘Pioneers!' shout I to them. ‘Ships are far nicer than cars!' 
They looked around and smiled, they recognized me.

The taxi driver takes me to the Bratislava restaurant which is a canteen on weekdays.
But today is the holiday celebrating my arrival and he also knows that it is the long-awaited-for I.

After washing my hands and refreshing my face with water from the tap in the toilet, I go up to the top floor.
The waitress brings soup.
There is a crease in the tablecloth left with the hasty ironing.
I pass my palm over it and the crease disappears. 
Well, no wonder, after ironing the heaps of swaddles it’s easy to smooth creases out with a simple laying hands upon.

I start eating soup cooked by the recipes of the port city. 
I am alone in the whole hall.
On a nearby low podium there stood silent loudspeakers and amplifiers of a restaurant group.
So, what will I listen to?
Okay, let it be the Smokie.
I flick my fingers. 
Silence.
What?! I am not omnipotent?!
Or there is some other way to switch the music on?. 

And then I got overwhelming, as from an unexpected blow, sense of a gross mistake. 
Somewhere, there was a fatal flaw in calculations.
I was awfully wrong somewhere.
The soup was not eatable anymore. 
Its rice turned into finely crushed shells that settled on the plate bottom with the layer of tiny mother-of-pearl fragments.
Somewhere I was wrong.
I forgot something.
But what?!

I started to pace between the tables, to and fro. 
The waitress approached and I explained that I couldn’t eat, I forgot something.
‘What?’
‘My jacket in the toilet.’ said I the first thing that came to my mind.

At that very moment, the door of the hall opened and a neat pensioner announced that my jacket was in the cloakroom downstairs. 
I went down to the cloakroom barrier where a woman with the juicy Odessa accent gave me my jacket that the old man brought to her from the toilet.
‘And the pockets had been filled to the utmost.’ told she with the reproach clear to both of us.
I went upstairs to pay for the soup from mother-of-pearl...

It's like in the table game when you rise higher and higher along the winding path of figures and then swiftly flash down the pipe drawn to the very bottom line of them. 

I rolled out into the street from the restaurant ‘Bratislava’, where I had intentionally left my jacket in the toilet because there were documents and money in it at the moment when I entered and was accepted into a new shining world where money and documents were not needed.
On the way to the bus station, I noticed a long slit in my pants. 
On the thigh.
Starting from the right pocket.
And I went on covering it by my jacket with empty pockets, without the gifts from the new world which I couldn’t keep.
The unlocked cell at the bus station was also empty, without my things.

For the last ruble, I bought a ticket to Youzhny and squeezed it together with the kopecks of the change into the back pocket. 

The bus was jammed with passengers standing in the aisle.
My neighbor on the seat, silently sighing, rubbed the damned un-outable stain on the skirt. 
I knew she had got stained because of my fault. 
And my flaw caused the stuffed bus to stop at each and every traffic light angry red.

Then the bus stood for a long time on a trenched street giving way to an endless file of disgruntled pioneers covered with the dust from the earthen piles on the pavement.
It was me who spoiled the holiday.

By and by, the bus got outside the city, the passengers were leaving at the stops.
I also got out at the last but one, because it was wrong to come to Yuzhny with a hole as big as the wound in Spartacus' leg. 
On the outskirts of the settlement, I respectfully greeted a boy of about twelve and asked for a needle and thread. 

He got it at once and led me to a secluded place in a weed thicket behind the fence of large stone cubes with thick mortar seams. 
Then he went away and returned with his friend who had a needle and a long black thread.
The boys sat on the fence with their backs to me.
I took off my pants and started sewing up the burst seam.

From the other side of the stone wall came the sounds of the sharp screech of tires, of the clashes and roar of engines along the difficult roads in the endless universal battle. 
The boys sat as mere on-lookers having no idea that behind their backs a member of RMS darned a wound on his thigh.
With gratitude, I returned them the needle with the remaining thread... 

When alone, I took out a Belomor cigarette, lit it and drove the remainder of the burnt match into the ground.
How she howled up!
In a desperate heartbreaking low, that black and white cow at the nearby tree.
How could I know that everything was so entangled and connected!

Then I walked through a dense willow thicket and in the sky above there hung a huge bird, like a stork, almost motionless with an escort of smaller birds stuck around him...

So, that’s it – the highest Head.
Devil, or God or What else could you be is more than I get it. 
It's a too entangled and confused mingle-mangle of a whipped up world.
And here I am and having nothing but the documents, a pocket notebook, a pen and the handkerchief with a small sailing boat. 
Let’s sign the contract, it seems so is the rule, eh?

I took out the pen and the bus ticket.
I did not know how to draw such a contract, so I simply put my signature below the lines of figures knocked out by the cash register at the bus station.
I put the pen in my pocket and the ticket upon the long leaves of a pliant willow fork.
I turned my back to the contract – it’s a fair play, no peeping.

A sharp gust of breeze swirled the bushes, but when I turned around the ticket was still in the same fork only turned over to the blank side. 

So that’s your signature?
Clever move, no one can forge.

I went out of the willow thicket to a high brick building, like the central warehouse of the KaPeVeRrZe Plant and started to ask where the personnel department was.
I was told that everything was closed already but after the second shift the bus was going to the city and I had to wait.
I waited a long time, then there was a long ride through the night by a small PAZ bus.

The fellow travelers in twos and threes were leaving the bus in dimly lit streets until the driver told me I had to get off too on the corner of a large empty square.
I saw yellowish lamp lights in a narrow street nearby and went along its fences, then turned to the left.
At the next crossing, I again chose the left turn. 

I heard claws clicking against the asphalt behind my back.
Judging by the sound it was a very big dog, but I was not afraid at all and did not look back and just went on walking slowly.

Ahead the same square opened and, not reaching it some twenty meters, I stopped.
Yes, it was clear – that’s my sentry point.

The lamp on a pillar poured down yellow light but I stood outside its cone where it could not reach my feet.

From the completely dark five-story block on the left, a cat ran stealthily across the road to the yard of a hutta and was met with a joyful jingle of a dog's chain – dating of antipodes. 
Even slaves have it at times.

The night went on and I stood motionless, pretending that I had nothing to do with that crushing din and ramble beyond the horizon where the movement of the universe mechanism was coming to a clash halt because of my fatal mistake in who knows what... 

When a dump truck pulled up behind me, I did not give way, but only threw up my right hand, because that was my post.

Those sitting in the cabin had no heads, impenetrable black darkness cut them off to the shoulders in the throw of the lamplight from the pillar.
The driver, who came down from the cab, had a head.
He led me, with care, aside.
I did not resist.
The dump truck left taking away the second one with the viper asp blackness upon his shoulders.

On the road, the black traces of tires remained. 
They should not be left there – the darkness would follow by those marks.
I began rubbing the traces away with the soles of my shoes.
Would they last long?

The wind was rising, an unfolded newspaper came frisking from the square and rubbed against my shank.
I made out the headline ‘The Prince’s Tomb’.
It had taken it a really long time to get there.
The newspaper rustled its goodbye and slipped further along the asphalt.

The sky became gray.
The exhausted but satisfied cat cautiously returned across the road to the five-story block to go on with her high society life in the lordly estate.
A pitiful whine of despair and pleading clank of the chain sounded after her.

The new day dawned but I stood there until a woman in a white dress appeared on the square.
She walked to the left, to the edge of the square unseen from my post.
An old woman in black appeared in her wake pushing a carriage.
But I knew there was no baby at all.
It’s eggs she was pushing along, white and round.
Grapes of eggs.

And I realized that I could leave my post and go on to the square...

I walked along empty streets until I turned into the door of a factory’s check entrance.
I entered a narrow room and asked for water from an old man in black spetzovka wearing glasses and a cap.

He gave me a glass of water and we both watched closely if I would swallow the black speck floating on the surface. 
I drank all of the water.
The speck remained stuck to the glass wall.
The man in black told me how to get to the Employment Office.

The office turned out to be locked but then a woman with the key came and opened it.
I said that I was looking for a job and she told me to wait for coming one more office worker, who would presently come.

Not far from the office there was an open diary cafe.
For all the remaining kopecks I bought a large bottle of milk.
But I drank only half of it.
Over a tall tumbler of thin glass, I uttered the parting words of Romeo: 
‘Here’s to my love!’
And then I drank it.

When I returned to the employment office the second worker was already in place.
I knew at once that she was Death and the one that came first was Love.

Death looked through my documents and exasperatedly announced that I had been divorced already, but Love smiled and said, that, well, so what? 
Then she went out to the other room to make a phone call and I stayed with the annoyed Death that looked a little like Olga.
Maybe because of her dyed hair, only longer.

On her return, Love said that there was a job for me at the Odessa Mining Management, I had to go to the Pole Explorers Square and see their chief engineer and tell him also to send a car for her because she had forgotten mention it. 
A car for Maria. Okay?

The chief engineer said there was no position for me at the management and only the job of a fastener at a mine which was incongruous with my higher education. 
I hurried to assure him that my education would not be in the way at all and he commanded me to get in the back of a truck standing by the porch of the management and drove me out of the city into the countryside. 

Apart from me, there was a tall and white but shabby refrigerator in the truck-back and a pair of black chains, like from a chainsaw only much longer. 
They looked like mating snakes and with the jostling of the truck-back over the road they kept sneaking up along its floorboards closer and closer to me.

In the village of Vapnyarka, the truck entered the grounds of some manufacture. 
The engineer told me to drop the chains from the back and I threw the damned snakes down into a deep puddle although there was a dry place too.
‘Got crazy?' shouted the chief engineer, but I saw that he liked what I did. 
The driver dragged the drowned serpents to the open door of the warehouse.

We drove to another place in the village and took the refrigerator into one in the group of summer cottages surrounded by a low common garden fence.
The chief engineer stuck its cord into a socket for a check and it hummed satisfied. 
‘I have almost forgotten,’ said I, ‘Maria wanted you to send her a car.’
In fact, I remembered those signal words all the time and only waited for the right moment.

The chief engineer showed how to get to a water tap in the street.
I went there, took off my jacket, washed my hands and arms up to the short sleeves, and also my face and neck.
Two militiamen with officer stars in the shoulder straps stood on one side from me, on the other two army officers in everyday uniform.
They waited patiently while I was splashing because I was with the chief and after that water, no needle would ever be able to pierce my neck skin. 
I walked away wiping myself with the tiny handkerchief that got wet through at once.

The truck left the village and went along the highway again. 
The road entered a steep descent and to the right there opened an inembraceably vast field. 
I could not understand what it was until in a second it woke up and stirred in a movement and long low waves with white crests ran to the shore.
So that is the sea then!

I took out the pocket notebook and, consulting the watch on my wrist, wrote it next to the back cover:

‘July 20, 1979

13 : 30 : 15

Eera

Sehrguey

Lilianna’

The highway went up again.
At the top of the ascent, the truck turned left onto a country road and through the outskirts of a village went to the field where the road ran along a forest belt.
Two kilometers further, after a long gentle tilt there appeared and were passed two or three barrack-like structures and after another hundred meters, the road ended in a wide pit with a cave-tunnel in the opposite wall where a narrow-gauge track ran past the office-cottage of the ‘Dophinovka' mine... 

Three worn-out armchairs with wooden armrests stood in the shaded room.
In the one with its back to the window curtains sat the mine foreman, about forty-five, with a thinning hair on his bald head and a mustache.
From the chair opposite, the chief engineer was telling him with laughter how I had thrown the chain-snakes into the water. 
The foreman did not partake in his mirth and the chief engineer guiltily subsided.
From his wary respect to the foreman, I could see who was really in charge there. 

I was sitting to the right from the foreman and, to his request handed over my passport, a little ashamed of its being so tarnished.
He opened it and, without touching the pages, past his right hand over them.
Their paper brightened before my eyes and got filled with life as if it had just come from the printing house and there even appeared some slight transparent glow from its texture. 
Both the chief engineer and I watched fascinated, we were not capable of miracle-doing... 

It seemed that I, after all, managed to reach the most supreme.
He had long since left the clouds and acquired the form of a foreman at an inconspicuous mine.
His name?
It shall not be taken in vain.
I can only share that he had chosen the patronymic of ‘Yakovlevich’.

I said that all my things were lost at the bus station and I had absolutely no money, and I needed to call my wife, she’d be worried.
The chief engineer at once outstretched a dark-blue five-ruble note to me and said that I would live in the hostel which we bypassed coming to the pit.
I needed no explanations that the hostel, as well as the mine itself, was a mere seeming in the world where one should be on the constant look-out. 
So I took the dark fuzz-mark off the bill and, getting rid of it, put gently on the arm of the chair...

Besides doing my jobs – at first a mine roof fastener, and later an assistant of the stone cutting machine driver, not to mention some short-term labors, I was in a constant tense search for an answer: what was hidden behind that seeming facade?
My looking for the answer continued also in Odessa, where I often went to make a long-distance telephone call to Nezhin from the intercity telephone station on the Pushkin Street.
Where was the money from?
I borrowed it in the hostel from Slavik Aksyanov, or his wife Lyuda.

In the, seemingly, hostel, assumingly, adapted from a, supposedly, cow-farm-house there were four rooms on both sides of a long corridor from end to end of the barrack-like building. 
In one of the rooms lived the childless young family of Aksyanovs.
Their neighbors were a Bessarabian family with a one-year-old baby. 
An elderly single electrician occupied the room next to them.
I was given a room across the corridor from which they took away the radio but left the grates in the window.

First of all, I pulled the iron frame with bars out and put it outside in the tall grass under the window.
Then I whitewashed the walls and for an entire evening was thrashing them with a tube of a rolled up newspaper in the battle with a myriad of vampire mosquitoes.
The following morning Slavik, looking fairly battered, asked what I was doing there all the evening after the repair.
‘Safari.’ said I curtly without going into detail, he obviously got his share in the battle.

The rest of the doors in the corridor were locked except for the first to the right from the entrance where there was a shower.

The mine workers were coming in the morning by a truck from Vapnyarka and New Dophinovka villages.
They drove up whistling and screaming like devils in the truck-back, but they called themselves Makhno bandits. 

Every two days a pair of them were filling the large tank of the shower with water from a small hut in a hollow some thirty meters from the hostel.
There was a deep well with a bucket on a chain around the iron shaft.
Electric heaters heated the water in the tank long before the end of the working shift.

Aside from the barrack-hostel, on the slope overgrown with tall grass, stood a tin paneled outhouse.
There was no door in it, so the facility had to be approached with some kind of a warning noise so as not to catch someone in the posture of an eagle on the roost.
From the doorless toilet there opened a magnificent view of the long sea inlet and its steep opposite shore.

(...there is a concept of ‘the stream of conscience’.
It presumes that a person is able to make mental comments on anything happening around them, or to think about something extraneous, having nothing, at first glance, to do with those happenings. 
By the widely entertained assumption, the Irishman James Joyce is viewed as the creator of 'the stream of conscience’, although he himself brings into play a certain French author from whom he, allegedly, picked up the idea.
However, much earlier that same stream, though not on a too prominent scale, occurred in meditations of the failed-to-be mother-in-law of Prince Myshkin in ‘The Idiot’ by Dostoyevsky.

So, ‘the stream of conscience’ seems to be one of those discoveries that have to be reached repeatedly and in different places, just in case, to ensure it not to be missed.
The ‘stream’, when boiled down, announces to the human race that a person is capable of exchanging thoughts with themselves.

What happened to me in Odessa in that crazy summer of ‘79 which turned out to be the most beautiful summer of my life, can hardly be called a ‘stream of conscience'. 
A stream? I pray, desist!
It was a waterfall!

I exchanged thoughts not just with myself but any-every-one-thing I came across.
Starting from a small pebble on a dusty roadside and to the night stars glinting dew-like in the sky.
‘Seen that?’
And the stars were answering with high-and-mighty indifference:
‘And more than that, and more than once...’
And they went blinking on the way they did the millions upon millions of years before our era.

And it did not bother me at all, that constant and strained wide-spray fire pump thought-gushing.
After all, the human brain is engaged for some 10% of its full capacity.
Let it have a knock-up, sweep away the cobweb and dust accumulated in the remaining percent!

Of course, during working hours the intensity of my brainstorm somewhat decreased – the workplace environment seemed more static and settled when compared to every-second changes of circumstances on the city streets. 
However, I can proudly state that even as deep as 38 meters under the earth surface, the intensity of my mental labor was much higher than the notorious ten-percent standard...)

The mine ‘Dophinovka' produced cubics – three dimensional building stone blocks of 20 x 20 x 40 cm cut out under the ground from the limestone strata. 
For this purpose, a drift tunnel was dipping from the wide pit going under 38-meter of other stratification layers. 
Down the tunnel, on its both sides and at different places there were branching out shafts—also tunnels, but lower and narrower—just like branches from a tree trunk.
At the end of those shaft-galleries there stood stone cutting machines that cut cubics from the wall in front of their noses.
Such was a general picture.

As for the details, my instructor in the roof-fastener job had a sonorous name of ancient Russ princes – Rostislav.
However, he did not respond to this name because of it sounded foreign even to him for everyone knew him as Charlic.

First of all, he led me to the shaft of Machine 3 because of his respectful trepidation before its driver whom Charlic called exclusively with the patronymic ‘Kapitonovich'. 
Being a petty demon, Charlic always made up to Kapitonovich, a stout devil of esteem, who had once served a stretch of ten years.

Both Charlic and I walked holding a flashlight in hand. 
Going to the mine, everybody received one from Lyuda Aksyanova, the lamp-recharger, in her cave by the entrance to the main tunnel.
Without the flashlight, you got into complete pitch-black darkness and could easily stumble at a rail of the narrow-gauge track, or at one of the rarely put sleepers under it and have a nasty fall.
 That’s why everyone in the mine wore a plastic helmet and each morning, before going down, they scribbled their signatures in a ledger to testify that they got instructed on safety rules and now knew their risks and were up to them.

The temperature in the mine was always above zero, even in winter.
A constant calm and underwater silence reigned in the shafts if no one talked to one another and no mechanism was working nearby.

We walked and walked along a narrow low gallery one wall of which bore serifs from a stone-cutting saw and the other was blocked off with a hedge of cubic debris.
The hedge was rather high but did not reach the gallery ceiling. 
In mining, the ceiling is called roof, but more on that later. 

Ahead of us appeared yellow dim light of a pair of light bulbs, crusted with dust, hung from a long white wire on the wall.
The stone-cutting machine stood to face the end wall and Kapitonovich sat waiting for us in its open seat. 
He worked without an assistant because he dreamed of earning 300 rubles a month.

The stone of the end wall in front of the machine—2,5 m x 2,5 m—was already crisscrossed with deep furrows of ‘the sketch'. 
The deep parallel cuts ran between side walls and that same way from the ceiling to the floor forming the butt ends of the future cubics.
Now, you just needed to drive a breaker in one of the slots in the center until a cubic is broken out. 
Then a couple of more next to it and the formed niche would give enough room to start breaking the rest with a sledgehammer. 

Kapitonovich was waiting for us because in the past two days the cutting machine moved forward away from the end of the narrow-gauge track. 
Charlic and I extend the railroad with two pairs of three-meter rails so that the mine cars, aka wagonettes, could be pushed closer to the end wall to stack the broken out cubics on them. 

If a wagonette got derailed, they called it a ‘bored-in wagonette' and two or three workers put it back on the rails, the method being called a ‘fart-steamer'. 

Then a tiny mining locomotive would come down from the open pit and pull back the wagonettes loaded with the cubics, collecting on its way up the loaded wagonettes waiting in the entrances to other machines' shafts. 

Not all of the cubics were breaking evenly off the wall, so before the next ‘sketching' the most sticking out pieces of the limestone had to be knocked off with that same sledgehammer. 

Those fragments together with the spoilage—cubics broken off too short, or split because of the cracks in the stone strata—served as the material to continue laying of the hedge along the shaft wall.
Without that masonry, there would be no room to shove the sand off. 

Where did the sand come from?
When the machine, with howling din and clang of its chain, cuts a furrow in the wall, a long stream of sand, or rather saw dust, gushes from the chain. 
The shield of metal-framed glass protects the machinist from whipping sand, although not from the clouds of dust.
The sand originates a dune around the machine and if it’s not shoved off with a shovel into the ‘pocket’ between the hedge and the wall there would be no room for the narrow-gauged track.

On achieving the labor victory in track-laying, Charlic takes the helmet off his head, puts it down and sits upon as on a potty – that’s much more comfortable than sitting on the floor, or sand, or rubble.
He lights a Prima begged from Kapitonovich and reverently asks about the meaning of the large stain of red in the stone of the right wall.

Kapitonovich explains weightily there once was the sea here with a steamboat on fire, which, eventually, sank leaving the red of the flames in the stone.
Charlic gives out a flattering giggle and I try not to thinks that ten years make a standard stretch for murder because I like Kapitonovich. 

Before leaving for other machines, we fix the roof in the shaft.
For this, Kapitonovich cuts a series of short horizontal slots under the very ceiling of the gallery.
When the stone between the slots is broken away with a breaker, a deep niche of 20 x 20 cm is formed up there.
The same operation is done on the opposite wall.
Now Charlic and I thrust in one of the niches the end of a not too thick log until it stops. 
The other end we raise to the opposite niche and shove inside, not too deep though, so as not to pull the log out from the first one.
This log is called a ‘ploshchuk’.
We prop it up with a pair of ‘stoyaks’ close to the side walls.
Now the shaft roof is fixed.

Where do the logs come from? 
Well, retreating some thirty meters into the darkness of the shaft where we had come from, we pulled out one of the previous fastenings.
Where else could they come from?

In the period of my work at the ‘Dophinovka' mine, there had arrived exactly three new logs. 
I personally ripped the bark off them and Slavik Aksyanov drove the wagonette with the deficit materials to the main tunnel.
So, the roof in the shafts was secured with the economically saved materials.

Sometimes the roof started to ‘drip’ or ‘get rainy’.
That is when it got crackling, splitting and dropping down pieces of rock.
Something like a collapse but not total.

Charlic got under such ‘raining’ in front of my eyes when pulling out one more of ‘economically saved’ logs.
He was lucky, though, laying on the sand heap between the hedge and the wall close to the ceiling.
The dropping plate of stone that separated from the roof did not have a place enough to speed up and just gently lay on his chest. 
Not a too big piece, half a meter to half a meter and only ten centimeters thick.

He immediately remembered Alic the Armenian.
When the roof started to rain, Alic had to retreat for sixteen meters, backward. 
Running, of course, as quick as he could.
Only there was no time to turn around with the roof crackling and falling and catching up.
So he had to run backward shouting all the way: 
‘Fuck the mine! Fuck the money!’
But who? That is the question.
So the roof in mining is not the same as an ordinary roof...

Besides the operating shafts, there also were abandoned ones in the mine. 
The layer of proper stone dwindled out there and they were left.
Entrances to such shafts had been sealed off with a wall of cubic rubble laid on mortar so that prevent drafts.
However, not all of the left off shafts were sealed. 

One time the foreman showed me the emergency exit from the mine.
Through one of such unsealed shafts, we reached the old trunk tunnel where once the wagonettes were pulled by horses. 
That drift also led to the open pit only on a higher level than the present one.
And that old tunnel also had its shafts.
When Charlic had a vacation and I remained the only fastener in the mine, I was pulling the logs from there.

One time I returned to the newer part of the mine, to the machine 4 shaft, so proud and pleased with myself that I was carrying a whole log alone.
With some stupid jest, like:
‘Here’s for Machine 4 by special order from Rio de Janeiro!’
And I dropped the log from my shoulder.
And the bastardy piece of wood—crackle!—fell apart into two.
Too ancient material.
But those gossips as if I was roaming the abandoned shafts without a flashlight were sheer lies.

That was because of when someone else’s flashlight was on, I turned mine off.
I did not even know why.
To save the energy?
It made no difference because after the shift all of the flashlights were delivered to Lyuda for recharging.
 A meter long length of wire connected the flashlight to the accumulator in the small canvas shoulder bag.
The flashlight bearing number 16 on its accumulator side was mine. 

In the forsaken shafts, I always turned the flashlight on and once it lit and showed some unearthly beauty. 
I couldn’t get it from afar what those sparkling drops were in the dark gallery.
It’s hard to describe – some spiky pure-white alien structure, or one from the ocean depth where even bathyscaphes could not reach, and there it was shimmering with tiny diamonds in the flashlight beam.
Awfully beautiful.

And I had an ax in my hand for checking if the logs were usable.
I waved the ax above it and the white thing fell to the floor. 
And I saw instead of the beauty there was a big spittle.
Then I guessed that it was a garland of mold.
Later I was coming across the like garlands, but only brown ones as if to punish for the murder of that beauty.

Then Charlic returned from his vacation and a new worker, Vasya, was given a job of a fastener and I got the job of an assistant of the stone cutting machine driver.

Well, it's not as romantic as walking the abandoned shafts and it's deafening, and the nose and mouth must be covered with a cloth because of the dust, but—wow!—familiar all faces! 
Breaker, Shovel, and Sledgehammer. 

However, all that was so at the first, uninitiated, glance.
What actually produced the ‘Dophinovka' mine under the unadvertised supervision of the supreme chief, that is Yakovlevich? 
Well, it depended.
Jedem das Seine.

The mining engineer Pugachov, who showed his pyramidally straight nose down there once a month, was interested in gold only. 
Or rather in the gold sand.
He would suck at the gold crown of a fang in his mouth and quietly ask the machinist: 
‘Enough sand today?’

After I had (unintentionally) heard him say that I started to dust out my spetzovka pockets at the end of each shift. 
Like, you’re not gonna buy me with your vile metal!
Moreover, that I did not know how to turn that sand into gold.
Tolik, the driver from Machine 2, got stunned when saw what I was getting rid of.

But there it was turned into gold indeed and then, under the guise of aluminum castings, stacked in the tall grass nearby the hostel.
Exactly like ingots of bank gold reserves, only of aluminum color, for camouflage, of course.
The foreman told me it himself in the almost open text: 
‘Such a worth and no one has brains to pick up, littered this way.' 
And where a mine for cubic production would get aluminum ingots from?
Or for what purpose?

As for the cubics themselves, they, naturally, were souls.
The Machine 5, for example, the machinist of which was Hitler, or else, Adolf (well, anyway, everybody called him so: either Adolf or Hitler) was producing human souls. 

Ivan, from Machine 1, felt hurt indeed that when his wagonettes were pulled to the pit up there, lots of his cubics were rejected, while anything from Adolf—albeit uneven and defected—went through. 
But, if you think about it, so it is – many human a soul happen with flaws.

And what is paradoxical, his namesake—Hitler—ruined so many souls, and this one, down here, turns them out slapdash and sneers at Ivan.

Whose souls were sawed out by other machines, I could only guess.
For archangels? Demons? Titans?. 

That’s what really depressed me most – my ignorance.

Yes, I felt, that I was a chosen one, but I remained a so sorely ignorant chosen.
Advancement to understanding went in trial and error method, checking each hunch I had on the way.

Sometimes there happened real insights as it was when I went to New Dophinovka after the shift to buy food for the next couple of days. 

Among the workers in the truck-back, there was some old woman in a headscarf. 
We were driving past the hostel and the Bessarabian stood in the doorway with the baby in her arms. 
‘So a nice baby-girl!' pronouncing these words the old woman released her headscarf and tied it up again but somehow different. 

I returned home walking through the fields along the forest belt.
But I could not get a rest in my room – the one-year-old girl of the Bessarabian family was choking with shrieks and crying, and her mother, not knowing how to ease the baby, was carrying her along the corridor—from end to end—rocking in her arms, saying ‘ah-ah!', but nothing helped. 

I can’t bear children crying, but the hostel is not a local train where you can move to another car.
And suddenly I remembered how the woman in the truck-back had tied her headscarf differently while praising this, so calm at that time, child.
I went out into the corridor and silently, but steadily looking at the baby's mother, took out my handkerchief from the pocket, stretched it open and folded back again, yet on the other side, after which I went out to the well-hut to fetch some water. 
When I returned the woman gave me a happy grateful look; the girl in her arms was perfectly calm, a kerchief had appeared on her head tied in a knot on the forehead. 
Bingo!

But there were misfires too.
The rooster walking around the hostel did not understand my fair intentions and contemptuously turned away when I offered him a grain of laundry blue from the pinch scattered on the bench at the hostel entrance.
The proposed supplement to the ration of the bird was based on good motives and freshly gained experience.
That day it was revealed to me, that the combination of blue and black symbolize strength: the cock with his black plumage would turn a super-cock had he picked that laundry blue speck...

And the fact that I was both chosen and protected one became obvious when one of the glassy-eyed was sneaking to me with undoubtedly vicious intentions...

There are three varieties of glassy-eyed.
Those in whom eye glassiness is combined with pronounced transparency of the eyeballs are harmless.
They, surely, are possessed, but remain just tools for obtaining information, like, what’s up and on and how it goes? – kind of a spyglass nothing more.

Where does the information flow? Who's the recipient? 
The former dwellers of Olympus in their current forms, be sure.

The second variety, with blurry luster filming their glass, are self-employed freelancers looking for a chance refreshment of ‘red and hot’ or somehow otherwise to get recharged on your account.
‘There's an underground passage for people, but we too may pass through,' one of them told me, apparently taking for one of her likes when in an unfamiliar and poorly lit area of night Odessa, I asked her how to get to the bus station – their favorite feeding trough. 

Those it was, waiting for me to get out of the ‘Bratislava’ with the torn thigh and they impatiently demanded of the woman in the cloakroom not to talk so much and set the game (me) out, for them to hunt...

When I was having a medical check for the employment (two weeks later after getting the job)  they also took my blood sample for analysis in the Vapnyarka village.
On entering the office I saw, besides the nurse, a lady sitting on the couch.
That same murkiness in eyes and a long flexible tube hanging from a corner of her mouth.
The nurse explained: the tube was just a probe, and the lady would not be in the way.
As if I could not see from her looks what kind of lady it was and why she was there…

The nurse, as usual, pierced my finger and squeezed, and the blood, instead of dropping, burst up in a tiny jet, no thicker than a needle, as the milk squeezed from a nipple of a breastfeeding woman.
I had never seen such a thing in my life!
And not only me – the lady’s jaw dropped and that, let’s say, probe wanted to pop out too.
Just like an alcoholic that had handed out a cup for a shot but they splashed in it a whole three-liter jar of moonshine.
What a loss of precious stuff!

As for reaching to the blood with their fangs, that’s just grandmother’s tales.
To get fueled they use some inconspicuous, unknown to me, but efficient technology.

The glassy-eyed of blurry type, who wanted to hunt me was a Volga driver having brought his boss to the hostel.
There also was a rarely opened office of the mining engineer visited by those arranging cubics to be taken from the pit.

That day, as always I came from the mine to hostel for the midday meal and was washing my hands by the washstand on the pole not far from the entrance.
The glassy-eyed did not know me because of being an outsider and he was sneakily closing in on me holding in the hands his weapon – an artifact of aluminum wire twisted in a special way, about twenty centimeters long.
Seeing that blurry filmed glassiness in his eyes and the cautious way of his crawling nearer, I realized that I was done.
The distance lessened yet the moment when he already could reach me with his thing, a gray kitten jumped out from the tall grass and rubbed his scruff against my black spetzovka pants. 

The glassy-eyed instantly lost any interest in me, lowered his wire and returned to the car.
The unknown rescuer-kitten who I never—before or later—had seen, disappeared into the grass...

But more often I had to rely only on my own prudent circumspection.
As on that narrow beach under the cliff of Chabanka.

I wanted to take a swim in the sea and had already entered the peaceful slow waves but stopped – two fishermen in swimming trunks with fishing rods in their hands stood ahead. 
Between them, there was enough space to swim forwards, but I realized that the rods were the barrier blocking the way to the sea. 
Only seizing the moment when they simultaneously pulled their fishing rods up, I plunged in and swam away from the beach. 

I swam for a long time, sometimes laying on the water for a rest and wondering why my father told that seawater supports a swimmer because of the salt in it. 
It made no difference to lying on the fresh water.

Then I swam again on my back facing the bright sky until I felt a touch on my shoulder. 

I looked back and saw a jellyfish in the water, semi-transparent and as wide as a basin. 
I swam around it but then I began to come across more and more jelly-fish – dodging one you run into another.

Popping up a bit out from the water I looked forward and saw a whole crowd of them and that they had turned the calm sun-driven waves into some jellyfish soup filled with their translucent bodies. 
I didn't get the nerve to breast that jellyfish soup, I turned back and swam back to the already distant shore. 

The shingle beach of Chabanka had some sandy stretches.
On one of them, near the water's edge, I wanted to write ‘Eera', but the waves did not allow. 
They ran up and leveled the wet sand before I had time to write out all the letters and I only scratched my finger to bleeding with the tiny shell fragments mixed with sand before I gave up.

But my first meeting with the sea was on the beach of New Dophinovka.
I went there after work, along the shore of the sea inlet that reached the hostel. 
The water in it was shallow and very transparent.
I walked until saw in the water some worn-out tires dropped there from the shore by stupid fools.

I took off my pants, went into the shallow water and dragged the tires on shore, but after one more bend of the inlet, I saw there was an entire trash dump in it  – a life would not be enough to drag all that out and it was evening already. 
Then there was a thicket of reeds stretching to the highway on the other side of which the wide vista of sea...

But when going to New Dophinovka by the country road, there sometimes were huge ships hovering above the sea.
The ships, of course, stood in the sea which merged with the sky so watching the view you saw a field and a ship above it and still higher or next to its bow the immense red ball of the setting sun.
Those ships were so large that they, probably, do not fit in the port and had to stay right there among the sea and sky.

With Slavik Aksyanov, I at first had normal relationships, even though I saw that in his past life he served as a Nazi officer in a death camp, and in the present liked to attracted public attention by empty talks.
And I even helped him to saw boards for the family couch.

The distance from Chabanka to the mine was also some two kilometers, but with no forest belt along the country road.
And in the fields, some arrogant flies always started to follow me, a whole swarm of them. 
They kept buzzing around and never lag behind.
But I did not want to bring a ‘tail of a follower’ behind me and thereby give out the location of the mine and I found a nice way of putting them off the track.
Nearby the hostel there stood a long structure of a former cattle farm which I used as the disinfection lock of a spaceship on unexplored planets. 

I entered the building from one end with all the flies swarming around and went to the exit at the other end.
The whiff of manure from once upon a time called then from everywhere, confused, they rushed in all directions in active search of fresher shit and I went out into the air with the food bought in Chabanka without a single buzzing follower behind my back... 

Slavik asked permission from the foreman to use some floorboards from the old farm to make a couch for himself and his wife because he was waiting for the arrival of his mother-in-law. 
Then we went and pulled out the boards for the project.
A rather decent material they were, only nailed too deep, but we had got a breaker. 

And then we started to discuss the future furniture dimensions. 
By that time I had already an entire well-developed numerological system.
With some of the individual figures there was even reached a complete clarity, that, for instance, 22 meant ‘death', 24 – ‘wife', 10 – ‘sex', and so on, and then just combine them the way called for by the situation. 

With the purpose of the product in mind, I offered him the best solution: 2 meters 10 centimeters.
Which read that 10 for 2 is the very thing for a young family.
But he balked!
‘I wanna have 2 meters and 30!’
Okay, you better know what you want…

He dragged a ‘goat’-trestle from somewhere, on which they saw the firewood and we started.
A board on the ‘goat’, two marks with the tape measure and – off we go!
Then we stopped to have a smoke.
At that moment his wife, Lyda, was passing by to the hostel entrance.
She pointed at the ‘goat’ and indignantly declared to Slavik:
‘Don’t you hope, that I ever lie upon this thing!’
That’s when I got finally convinced that she was a part of a different world.
What normal woman had never seen a ‘goat’?

Apart from that, she could read thoughts.
I once entered their room, Slavik ate soup watching television.
I said I was not hungry and sat by the door to wait for him to finish off his havvage.
And behind his back there stood a refrigerator with a mirror put on its top face down.
The mirror frame had a pair of plastic legs to keep it upright when not in the lying position.
From the chair I was sitting in the puzzle collected into a coherent picture: Slavik, eating the TV with his stare, ladles the soup into himself with two green legs sticking out of his hair in the form of lyre-shaped horns, only without strings, of course.

Then I thought to myself, that is, inside my mind:
‘So, you're not only a Nazi but a cuckold too!' 
Lyuda read that thought and directly went to the refrigerator, she put the legs down and gave me an eloquent look.
Like, we need no of your comments on the skeletons in our family cupboard!

In general, when Slavik fired up the test flights on that aerodrome of a couch in their room, there cropped up some inconsistencies in the game. 
Three days later he dragged it out of the hostel in the tall grass and shortened with a hacksaw. 
That is what the trial and error method is about.

And when his mother-in-law came he started to have fits of frenzy.
He visited my room and made faces.
The purpose of his grimaces was clear to me without any explanations – he wanted to drive me mad. 

Once Ivan, the driver of Machine 1, called me to share a meal with him and his assistant in their shaft.
His wife worked in the canteen of the military school where also were trained Negroes from the countries of awakened Africa.
So those Afro-Africans were not too hungry, judging by the amount of provision she brought home from there. 

When Ivan removed the lid from that aluminum pan, it was brimming with meat on ribs, and nothing else. 
The three of us—Ivan, his helper and I—hardly managed to finish off that hecatomb, leaving a pile of bare ribs beside the pan. 
And then Slavik came to borrow some spare part for his machine, on seeing that cannibal still-life he distorted his mug in earnest bitten by the recollection of everyday oats from his mother-in-law, most likely.

Later in the evening, when the hostel residents were enjoying the coolness of nearing night, he wanted to fight me.
He even snatched one ingot from the gold stock in the tall grass, raised it with both hands over his head and threw at me.
The action resulted in a really beautiful sight – the full moon pouring its tender light onto the arc-shaped trajectory along which the ingot flew gleaming with white, apparently aluminum color.
(Maybe, I was wrong after all and the mine was mining platinum?)

Now it was my turn to ran backward in the manner of Alic the Armenian.
Slavik’s wife, Lyuda, took him home from the arena of demonstration performances.

In my next visit to Odessa, I dropped to a legal consultation.
I did not plan it at all, just their office sign caught my eye.
Without leaking any names or geographical locations I asked for a recommendation if pestered by a neighbor in the hostel.
‘Turn to the Komsomol Committee of your enterprise.’
Well, and those also not of this world.
I told you – they are everywhere already.

But if the Supreme Head was Yakovlevich, then who the chief engineer was?
It’s not difficult to guess – who’s the Creator’s antipode?
Prince of Darkness and master of all impure, in all his glory.

That could be seen even in their relationship – respectful, but armed neutrality.

I remember them standing in the tunnel and talking to each other, correctness itself.
The foreman in his black spetzovka and the chief engineer in a summer shirt with a white handkerchief bent over its collar to keep the dust off.
If there was safari helmet on his head instead of the plastic one it would be a ready picture ‘I’m the master here!’
Although, of course, the depths under the ground are his domain.

(...you could protest: how’s possible a contact between such antagonistic opposites?
Do not forget – it was the twentieth century around, in its second half, when everything got so intertwined, confused and tangled that a simplistic geometry no longer helped…)

I took the position of a sympathizer to the foreman.
I liked him and without miracles, moreover, that for me, in fact, the one with the passport was enough.

By the way, the chief under Chief also presented his credentials.
One day during the midday break he came to hold a trade union meeting. 
(Ahem.)
We settled under the trees by the hostel.
He got seated on a chair and took off his shoes, and socks too.
Like, who’d ever told I had hooves?
Nothing of the kind!
But I was not to be caught with illusory chaff.

The devils of Makhno bandits lay down in the shady grass in their black spetzovkas. 
Only I was in the nylon shirt which I wore in the mine under the spetzovka jacket and every evening washed in the shower.

(...nylon is ideal for washing: you rub it for six seconds and its clean and it gets dry even faster…) 

I also took off the helmet.
Like, you wanna make me believe you’ve got no hooves? So, admire then my hornlessness.
All the other workers had their helmets on, especially Slavik Aksyanov.

And so it went on for some ten minutes when suddenly the rooster crowed.
Surprise!
The chief who’s not the Chief shoved his socks into his pockets and thrust his feet into the shoes and raced to the country road.
And there, as if from under the ground, popped up a biker in black and in a black leather ribbed helmet, like the miners wore at the times of the first five-year plans. 
And they whizzed off in the New Dophinovka direction.
Not clear enough?
Who shoots away at a rooster crowing?

Not that I confronted with him, but there were certain frictions.
So it was when a truck dumped a heap of coal for the winter and I shoved all that anthracite into the stoke-hold.
At the end of that day he came from Vapnyarka and asked me, haughtily so:
‘Well, how much you want? Three rubles enough?’

I grew amok: half a day in the sun, and he, as to a dirty wretch, offered a pittance.
Okay, you’re the prince of darkness, but I am also a chosen, even if not initiated.
‘No!' said I, ‘let I am paid the worth of my labor.' 
‘You won’t get such an amount then.’

I did not believe him and the next day applied for a day-off and went to the Mining Management in the Pole Explorers Square.
I was shown the door of the chief accountant office, Weitzman was his name. 
No sooner had I stepped into his office than the phone on the desk rang. 
He took off the receiver:
‘You are listened to.’

(...just like that, word for word: ‘you’re listened to.’
Clear, smooth, distanced.
Without sticking his neck out for a fraction of a millimeter. 
That's some Weitzman for you!..) 

I depicted the essence of the matter in hand, he got it at once and took out a thick book in a gray paperback ‘The Unified Norms and Tariffs’, and he found in it where it was about loading and unloading of loose coal and gave me to read.
There it stood in black and white, that even if I were shoveling that coal in an area north of the Arctic Circle—to be paid with the highest northern coefficients applied—and with each shovelful of coal I were circling three times around the hostel before throwing it into the stokehold window—to gain the distance of moving the load—then, by the rates from that normative bible, I was entitled to the payment of 1 ruble and 20 kopecks. 

(...and it was revealed unto me, who did not know the truth hitherto, that to foremen, supervisor, engineers, etc., etc., should the workmen bow low for the lies added to work orders.
Without the addition of false figures, the working class would die out long ago together with their families. 
Pray for your benefactors and bread givers, workmen!
But what bastard composed all those rates and tariffs?
I would share my shovel with them in a brotherly way…)

His diggings were near Hunchback Bridge in Odessa.
There he lived in a house of his own, together with his wife and their son, fifth-grader.
He treated me to a glass of home-made tomato juice.
(Ahem…)
Everything as expected – some red, thick, brackish liquid. 
But could I say ‘no’?
Margarita also drank it, at the annual ball in Moscow.

Yet till now, I brew the black tea after the recipe he shared.
That evening he also shared his memories about working in the Arctic, where, after work, he put a pair of bricks on an electric stove and seated his wife on top of them to bring into the working conditions for the night... 

One time the impure attempted at a putsch, they wanted to change the world layout of stratification.
The day before it the mining engineer Pugachov arrived at the hostel and opened one of the locked doors in the corridor. 
Like, to distribute food products to be paid for later, at the payday.
I walked along the corridor and Slavik Aksyanov shouted to me from that room:
‘Come on, come get it too!’
There were five Makhno devils inside and a box of ‘Prima’ packs upon the desk.
Pugachov was meting out from 5 to 10 packs each.
Food products, eh? Ammunition supplies!
‘No, thank you, ‘Belomor’ is my smoke.’
Going out I still heard Slavik motivating the devils:
‘No fear! Youth will write off everything!’

The next day not a single traffic light worked in Odessa.
It was a day of complete bedlam.
People were shouting at each other and the trolleybuses jumping like mad.
There was no shooting, of course, because the putsch went on on a different level.
However, by my estimations, it failed because I was in time to buy ‘The World Atlas’, a thin booklet in a soft green paperback.

In Odessa of that period, the most stable and widely used expression of approval was ‘that, what you love!’
‘How do you like Sonya’s new groom?’
‘That, what you love!’
And, instead of ‘no', they said ‘dick to mama!' 
But, with Odessa-Mommy around, it sounded even patriotic.
‘So ‘Black-Sea Footballer' won, or what?' 
‘Dick to mama!’

In the small park on Deribassov Street, grew some unseen trees looking, as if they had cast off their own bark.
In the evening there played the brass band, almost like in the times of Johann Strauss, but rarely.
And in some other park, but by day, I jumped into the pool from a five-meter high tower,
It even whistled in the ears during the dive.
A little later two boys jumped two, holding hands, but it was a heels-first flight, one of them had black socks on.
They were concealing my footprints from possible followers that way.

At the intercity phone calls station in Puskin Street, they played a good joke on me. 
I made the order and waited, then went out onto the sidewalk and stood by the open door.
The moment I lit a cigarette the loudspeaker inside shouted:
‘Nezhin! Is anyone waiting for Nezhin?!’
I threw the cigarette into a trash bin by the door and ran back.
‘It’s me! I am waiting!’
And the telephone operator in her microphone:
‘So, wait then!’
The crowd in the hall split their sides.
That again, they were saving me from something.

Some mujik was waiting there too.
They announced his number connected:
‘Chelyabinsk on line! Enter Booth 5!’
To which with unconcealed disappointment he reacted:
‘Eew!’
And went where was told to.
That's an enlightened one! But merely the booth number he knew beforehand the talk result! 

I got to know Odessa very well.
On foot, for the most part. 
I found Public Library Nr. 2.
And the bazaar of Pryvoz, where the porters in blue robes pushed station trolleys in front of them with the shouts ‘Feet! Feet!’, so that the crowd would give way to them with their abbreviated 'watch your feet!'.
There, in Pryvoz, an old gypsy cast a spell on me by their witchcraft means.
I did not get it why, but she should know better. 

The Factory of Gastric Juice.
Who would ever imagine there were such enterprises!

When I passed through the yards of five-story blocks, mujiks playing ‘the goat’ would bang the bones louder against the tables to shoo off the cats so they would not run across the sidewalk in front of me.
Allies too.
To Odessa I was going by bus, only a couple of times on foot.
There were just twenty kilometers all in all.

And one time I went from Vapnyarka to New Dophinovka along the seashore, over the cliff. 
In one place there stood some military installation behind the fence of barbed wire.
The sentry shouted from there it was forbidden to walk by their site and demanded to show my documents.
I showed him through the wire my handkerchief with the sailing boat in the circle.
He realized at once that the level was different.
‘Okay, go where you were going.’

From up the cliff, the sea view was very beautiful. 
The sea was quiet, almost smooth. 
And sparkled under the sun.
Sometimes the wind rushed along to ripple the water and draw various types of galaxies.
Spiral, for the most part.
The wind was copying them from the clouds that hovered above the sea.

In a tram to the beach of Arcadia, I saw Gray from our construction battalion. 
It surprised me a little – four years had passed and he remained looking so young and for some reason in the black sea cadet uniform, the cap with ribbons.
I stood up and quietly asked into his ear: 
‘Gray, is it you?’
He did not respond although heard me for sure.

And another time it was my father.
By a newsagent booth.
He did not look like my father at all, I only recognized him by his voice.
It was with that voice he described the murderer, whom the camp chief brought to a new murder.

When he spoke to me, I pretended that I was overly examining a portrait of the psychiatrist Burdenko on the ‘Ogonyok’ magazine cover, which hung behind the booth wall glass, so it was the seller who answered him.

(...with such meetings anyone will start asking themselves: what’s going on?
But you can't get an answer to it without understanding the monad. 
A monad is a gadget from philosophy, which every one understands in their own way. 
For someone, it is a singularity from a set, and for someone else –  a set of singularities. 
For example, when a guy asks his girl:
‘Tell me! Am I for you just another one of many, or from many the one?’
Here the second ‘one’ is that very monad, or, maybe, vice versa.

In some Indian Bible, there is a bright picture: a child creeps along the grass, a step ahead of him a kid is running, before which a man walks, just about to overtake a crooked old man, and then again the grass. 
The picture is called ‘The Circle of Life’.
That is, from nothing to nothing.
Now, all together they are one monad because it's the same person. 
And it only remains to assume, that monads can be formed in a different way; for example by the timbre of a voice; and everything falls into place. 
It depends on from which end you approach the monad: from here – it's your father, from that one – a homeless drifter addresses you by the stall with Burdenko. 

Of course, all that is a bit more complicated than memorizing the chant: ‘if you stumble with your left leg – everything would be okay, when with the right – not even try, turn back and go away’,
but explains a lot…)

One of the Odessa Preferans players was in his youth a part of the underground.
Then he reformed and began to collaborate with the television studio of Odessa as a commentator of the latest criminal news. 
He even wrote a book sharing impressions from his bandit past.
So he claims in that book that the year of your birth, and especially the summer was marked in Odessa by an unseen surge in the violent crime situation. 
A rare case when the printed text could not convince me.
That summer I myself was present there and did not notice anything of the kind.

Which speaks in favor of the theory of the existence of parallel worlds.
Both the reformed commentator and I lived in the parallel world of his, each of us two was receiving different impressions from different worlds connected only by the ordinal number of the year.
For all my repeated detours and passes through Odessa, I had noted only two occasions of the interpenetration of our parallel worlds. 

The first happened in the morning on the bus Gvardeyskoye-Odessa, when a young guy on the second seat on the right rebuked the driver for a minor change in the route within the city.

Upon arrival to the bus station by New Bazaar, the driver hurried from his cabin into the bus with apologies and technical (maybe even over obsequious to some extent) explanations.
He was forgiven when the other passenger from the same seat spoke for him to her easily irritable companion.

The second interpenetration occurred in the building of the railway station where I asked a militiaman about the number of population in the city of Odessa.
For an answer, he directed me to the police station on the first floor. 
The on-duty lieutenant to whom I repeated the question, told me to wait for a little. 

Obedient to his instruction, I leaned against the barrier separating us and watched as the red worms of his lips lustfully covered, squeezed and twirled the filter of his unlit cigarette under the accompaniment of heavy thuds and loud yells behind my back. 
With a fleeting glance to that direction, I noted the open door to the next room where a woman in a kerchief and the black robe of a janitor was kicking the shit out of a wretch in just his red underpants with the wooden handle of her mop. 
I never turned back again until the end of the execution, especially since under my trousers there were exactly the same underpants.
On getting the pleasure in accordance with his rank and position, the lieutenant lit the cigarette and said that a million was not reached yet; maybe about six hundred thousand people.

That's why when on my next visit to the city and being late for the last bus to New Dophinovka, I preferred the greens inside the circular intersection in front of the railway station to spend the night. 
It turned out to be completely deserted because the underground passage to it was unlit.
Having chosen the most distant from the lamppost bench, I lay down.
On hard bench beams I recollected Edgar Poe killed in Baltimore, state of Maryland, for $40—a literary fee he had just been paid—and partly pulled out the advance I received that day in Pole Explorers Square, like a flirty handkerchief made of three-ruble notes, for the purpose of self-training my courage.
The traffic along the circular intersection had almost ceased, but the bench became even harder. 
However, I kept my eyes shut for the principle's sake because night is for sleeping. 

And I was not sleeping, when I heard cautious steps along the rounded path.
He walked up and for a minute stood over me lying on the bench with Edgar Poe’s mustache, in a blue T-shirt with the Soviet three-ruble banknotes protruding from the breast pocket on it.
Then he left as quietly as when approaching.
I did not open my eyes, for the sake of principle, to see who it was.

In the morning I woke up on the same bench rather chilled and stiff as a board but, unlike the great American romantic, alive.

A flock of ravens flew croaking in the dawn sky, flapping their wings.
Seemingly the same ones that coasted above Nezhin in the northeastern direction on the day D.
It took them a long time to get here. 

A feather separated from the wing of one of them and, somersaulting in zigzags, kept falling down.
The face upturned, I followed the jerky trajectory and walked to intercept it despite the dug up beds with welking flowers.
At the meeting point, I reached my palm out under the black dodger, caught it and went back to the asphalted path. 
There I dropped it tenderly into a trash bin saying:
‘Not with me around, please.’

(...a lesser-known German poet from the first half of the 20th century once complained of his unworthiness, otherwise, he would not allow for the world self-massacre. 
Few of the venerable laureates rise to such deep understanding of a poet’s responsibility for the fate of the world.
They inertly cling to the accepted standpoints and rituals of their time, and yet, if you think about it closely…)

However, just to think is not enough, it’s also necessary to think out, as Valentin Batrak, aka Lyalka, cared to say somewhere.

On reaching the deadline for my return and taking you and Eera over, there, in fact, was no place to bring you to.
However, having given the word, I had no choice but come back and at least explain the reasons for the postponement of the move.

I had no money for the travel, neither anyone I addressed for a loan.
The need called for the idea to hand the wedding ring over to the pawnshop.
While I found it in the city, it had already opened and the line started from the front door.

The pawnshop was a long room with barriers along three walls.
There were small rounded windows in the sheet glass partitions above the barriers and one of them even had grates.
To that very window, the farthest one was lining all that crowd.
When the pawnshop was closing for the midday break I was forth from that window.

In the breast pocket of my shirt, I had the ring which hardly could rape off the finger the night before.
Even the soap and water from the washstand near the hostel were of little help.
At those self-inflicted tortures, I remembered the projectionist's booth in the Plant Park and sympathized with Olga. 

The pawnshop opened again and after waiting for one more hour I fearfully handed the ring to the window because a person before me failed – her earring turned out not to be of gold.
My ring passed checking and I received 30 rubles together with the pawnshop ticket.

The following morning I came to New Bazaar and bought a blue plastic mesh, and four kilos of apricots to fill it with, they were not fully ripe though.
Then I went to the booth with flowers and said that I needed three red roses.
For the flower girl, it sounded like a special password and from a special place behind the counter she took out small dark red roses, exactly three, on sturdy long stalks. 
‘You meant these?’
‘Sure.’

From the bazaar, I went to the airport—not much better than the one in Stavropol—and stood in the line till the midday break. 
When the ticket office window was closed, I remained standing nearby, like a statue with the three red roses in my hand, and only put the apricots on the floor under the window. 
Keeping four kilos for an hour was too much of strain for a hand.

After I bought the ticket, there remained four hours before the departure and I was already tired of life with my hands busy keeping something.
I took the flowers and the fruits to the automatic storage cells, but I could not leave them inside because I felt sorry for them.
They would suffocate there with the air and light cut off.
Looking around a small corridor I found the janitors room and asked for permission to leave the roses and apricots there.
They accepted them and I went out into the city hands-free but I did not go too far away. 

At six I came after the roses.
The janitors were washing the floor in the corridor and one of them told I'd better wait. 
I insisted on getting them at once for to get in time on the plane departing in half an hour.
She grinned and without further arguing let me take the roses sticking out of one of their tin pails with water. 
The janitor only warned that they had treated themselves on the apricots a little bit.

I went to a long shed on the edge of the take-off field and, together with other passengers with the tickets for that flight, waited until midnight because each half an hour the loudspeakers announced a delay of the flight to Kiev.
My fellow travelers also tried the apricots and approved.

After the midnight, in the sharp light of the arc lamps along the runway, two stewardesses were counting us on the stairs to have no more than 27 passengers because they substituted for the flight a smaller aircraft, AN-24.
When on board, it took some time to become warm after the chilly night breeze from the sea during that long wait.
I’d better have agreed to the janitor.

At the takeoff, I was fighting down the thoughts that they could have brought the asphalt while I was away.

At the mentioned meeting of the trade union, the chief engineer informed that the builders had come across sharps in their scores.
For those unfamiliar with the music notation, he put two fingers of his left hand over two on the right one, crosswise, representing prison grates. 
Therefore the construction works would continue those who wanted to live in the new hostel.
The Aksyanovs and I enlisted for moving to the new hostel and the Bessarabian family abstained.

The new hostel was located about twenty meters from the old one and also was a former cattle-farm building.
The rooms in the future hostel were spacious and high.
I chose the one with the view of the sea inlet.
However, the walls of our would-be home still needed plastering and the window frames were without the glass, but I liked our place even though it had neither doors nor the floor yet. 

Once they dumped a truckload of hot black asphalt next to the new hostel for to make floors in the rooms. 
Aksyanov and the assistant at his machine were carrying asphalt with a wheelbarrow to the Aksyanov's rooms, and I with a pair of pails to ours. 
They managed to make asphalt floor in both of his rooms, and I in the half of just one, but of better quality before the asphalt heap outside was finished off. 
That’s why while the plane was gaining altitude I did not want the asphalt to be brought without me around.

Then I started looking out of the window.
The moon was absent from the cloudless sky, but the stars were shining, thousands of distant stars.
And below the lights of cities and towns, no bigger than the stars in the sky, were shimmering too. 
And I thought I’d like for the pilot not to lose his way among all those stars from every direction.

Then deep below under the wing of the plane, I could make out the lights in some, probably, a village that exactly repeated positioning of the stars in the only two constellations known to me in the night sky. 
The village lights presented a replica of the Little Dipper and I calmed down because it’s impossible to get off the right course with the Polar Star in the view.

At six in the morning I got off the Kiev-Moscow train at the station of Nezhin and by the first bus of the day came to Red Partisans.
The door was opened by Ivan Alexeyevich who hardly recognized me because I had become so lean.
I took the blue plastic mesh with the apricots to the kitchen and carried the red roses to the bedroom past the sofa in the living room where the mother-in-law was already starting to move.
Both of you were asleep.

I put the roses on the table under the pier mirror and look behind the window curtain.
The handkerchief with the anchor was gone from the windowsill.
Okay, I could ask later. 
I undressed went to bed and hugged Eera in her long white nightgown.
‘Oh! You?’
‘Yes.’
‘So scraggy?!’
‘Hush, you’ll wake up the baby.’

Then Eera told that her sister Vita was on a visit in Odessa and wanted to see me at the mine.
She reached the village of New Dophinovka, but a villager Natalia Kurilo advised against going any further because of a too difficult road. 
‘Yes, that Natalia sits at the mine office in the pit up there.’
‘She complained that you don’t listen to anyone but the foreman.’
‘How could she know? She sits up there.’
‘So she knows if she’s saying... And how is all over there?’
‘There all is so… class. The sea is… well, in general… Ships above the field...’
‘But you got really skinny… Have you had it with someone there?’
‘You crazy?!’
‘Quiet! Don't wake the baby up! Well.. you were doing something now… You've never been doing that before.' 
‘Ah… I got it from the stone cutting machine. The disks move that way.’
‘What’s your position there?’
‘Some long-named one. The assistant of the stone cutting machine driver. But to myself, I call me shorter – a phallic associator.' 
‘What’s that?’
‘From old Greek. It’s a long story.’
‘And what about housing conditions there?’
‘We’ll have two room. So big. Tolik from Machine 2 says they are well located. Looking away from the winter winds. And the sea inlet under the windows.’
‘But look at yourself! Thin as a rake!’
‘Hush! The baby!.’

But you still got awake.

‘Look, where’s the handkerchief that I've left on the windowsill?’
‘What handkerchief? I've never seen any.’

In general, that’s correct.
To see a thing you have to know what you’re looking for.
I, for example, could not recognize the sea at once. 

(...so the sailing boat had not found its anchorage and later it disappeared too.
Maybe up to now, it's still sailing the expanses of the universe somewhere…) 

Of course, it was not very pleasant to hear from Eera that they told her in the maternity hospital that her hymen had not been completely broken and you had to do it from the other side.
For my part, I did not feel any change after such an unorthodox loss of virginity by my wife.

I also did not feel any guilt, because I always did as best I could.
Besides, she was not the first virgin to give birth.
Leaving aside the Holy Family, our particular case was the result of programming through a novel of a French writer Herve Bazin, which I read back in my adolescence.
Although there was no birth-giving, yet, anyway, I should not be given to read just anything at all...) 

I went to Konotop to collect warm clothes, the sheepskin coat, rubber boots.
My father gave me his black navy pea-jacket with copper buttons in two upright rows.
I even took my guitar with me, because I was moving in earnest and for a long time.
And in Konotop, they also were grumbling that there had remained only half of me, but I felt great. 
My mother wrapped the things in a white cloth and sewed it up.
It turned out a bulky and thick bale.

But I had to do one more thing.
To do and – cut and run.
To do, and lie low at the bottom, in the mine of ‘New Dophinovka’.

(...Throughout all these five years plus, I was perfectly aware that everything should be paid for.
Nothing is given for nothing.
And I don’t mean money for pot, which goes without saying.
I mean the main payment for getting stoned, high and on the flights.
And the closer to the final full-stop in the trough of the common urinal at the Kiev intercity bus station, the deeper I realized that I even knew who exactly was paying the unreasonably high—more expensive than any money—price for my buzz. 
I had neither desire nor opportunity to share that knowledge with anyone because of its being a complete crazy nonsense. 
That's why I silenced it and kept it hid and buried away even from myself, but it came back to me over and over again—even when not stoned—that I was irredeemably indebted to the long-suffering people of Cambodia sweating in the sub-equatorial hothouse climate of southeastern Asia. 
And there was no forgiveness for me.

Nothing comes from nowhere, and it is the immutable truth. 
The tactile sensations of my maiden getting high in the stoker-house of the construction battalion established an inextricable link between being on high and getting smashed in the brains. 
Subsequently, the rigor of the interdependence was smoothed out, but the buzz continued to flow in.
Which gives rise to a question: if not me, then who gets the smash in the brains?

By the end of the five-year-plus period there came the answer.
The Khmer Rouge troops, when seizing another village, killed its inhabitants, the same Cambodians as themselves.
To save the ammo, they were killing them with striking bamboo sticks against their skulls.
Then they turned the bodies on their backs and photographed dead faces, like for a passport.
In those pictures, the right eye is half closed and the left one bulging out. 
I saw them.
Multiple rows of those pictures—dead people with feline faces—were regularly placed in the central newspapers.
They looked like some different non-human race, them those people with as if skinned faces.
I had what to feel guilty about.
Of course, after the events accompanying my first flight to Odessa, the peasants' brains were being smashed out not for me anymore, which did not stop the show so that someone else would get a kick. 

In Odessa, I found myself in the midst of a universal battle of the unknown who against whoever else. 
In the course of inconceivable vicissitudes, I became a somewho’s ally, making enemies with whoever else, still remaining in the complete dark as to who is who?
Though one thing was clear – those, with whom by the will of the fate I happened to be on the different sides of the barricades, would not fail to track me down and square the accounts. 
It’s no coincidence, that while I was getting off the Kiev-Moscow train in Nezhin a window in one of its cars opened and a glassy-eyed (apparently from the monad of the chief engineer) spit out a long stream of saliva on the platform.
That undoubtedly was a mark for other militants from their dark legion where to pick up my further trail from and trace my subsequent movements up to Konotop.
And here they would easily and inevitably discover the hemp plantation at the end of the garden of my parents’ hutta in the Settlement.
With incalculable and unimaginable consequences of the most horrible nature.

My duty before the allies and those not still finished off peasant in squalid villages in humid depths of jungles of southeast Asia prompted the only right decision…)

In the shed at the Decemberists 13, I took the bayonet type spade and went to the plantation on the farthest bed.

They stood proud of their almost three-meter height. 
Issuing the piercing rich aroma.

(…forgive me, I know you want to live, forgive that I was late for that train to Odessa, and now I have to do what I have to, forgive me…)

And they were falling—one after another, one next to another, one on top of the other—from the bayonet strikes piercing deep, separating the roots, cutting the life off... 

I stacked them in a high pile, went back to the shed and returned with a canister of gasoline.
A crackling fire rose up, a thick white smoke floated.
Alarmed by auntie Zina, my mother hurried to the garden.
‘Seryozha!.. What are you… Why?. How is it?..' 
‘So it is necessary.’
She left and my brother Sasha came instead.
‘Seryoga, what are you doing?' 
‘So it’s necessary.’
My brother always believed that I knew what I was doing even when I did not know it myself. 
He stopped asking me, but just stood there and we both looked at the fire turning the dense green of the dumped on a pile trunks and branches into black charred sticks and fine ash, brittle and white…

I arrived at Odessa in the dark and managed on the 6.00 bus from the New Bazaar.
Outside the city, an irresistible drowsiness overcame me and I missed the stop and only woke up after three hundred meters later.
At my request, the driver stopped the bus at the top of the climb and I crossed the forest belt.

In the garden of the outermost cottage amid the thinning twilight of the last night, an elderly mujik in his underwear and a woman in a white nightgown swept, for some reason, the beds with brooms. 
They moved in a strange way, like robots.
The mujik’s eyes were filmed with the glassines.
I did not see the woman’s eyes though, she was careful to keep them turned away.
Rather an incomprehensible view for so early an hour, but I could hardly be surprised at anything already.

In my four-day absence, they did not bring any asphalt. 
The worn-out pink painted plaster of the hostel building was for some reasons spattered with blue splashes and dispersed lines like to camouflage.
But why blue?

I got in a rut at the mine.
The weather changed because one day coming back from Odessa I found that in my pocket remained just one three-kopeck coin of greenish old copper. 
‘That’s not money,’ thought I to myself and threw the coin back over my shoulder between the trees of the forest belt.
For exactly three days thereafter the cold wind blew from the sea, refuting my dismissive opinion of the three kopecks and driving home to me the meaning of the expression ‘to throw money to the wind’.

The single electrician died on the road from Chabanka before reaching the hostel. 
They found him three days later.
I always knew that was a dangerous stretch of the road.
In summer, there were constantly flying fluffy spherical balls like to sea mines, but white and smaller, of course.
Probably, one of them had scraped the defunct when he was not quick enough to dodge.

They buried him in the village cemetery, on the cliff between the highway and the sea.
Kapitonovich was carrying a wooden cross ahead of the coffin, like a banner, but he himself had a sash of a long narrow towel like a matchmaker at a wedding.
Instead of pinning a handkerchief up the sleeve as at Konotop funerals.
What else could one expect of them?
They heard the song but got the wrong sow by the ear. 

In the father's pea-jacket with yellow buttons, I presented a colorful figure, like, a seaman from the black-and-white movie ‘We are from Krondstadt', but I also helped to fill up the grave. 
Then we were taken back to the hostel by a bus.
The women from the mine office in the pit prepared the wake feast from their home supplies. 
I wolfed away no less than at the Tshombe’s field camp.

The repaired radio set was brought back to the hostel and I had to move into the room of the diseased electrician. 
Soon Vasya, a new fastener, joined me there.
At first, I doubted his sex, when accidentally noticed red-brown stains on his bed sheets, as if from menstruation.
He started to explain that they were from a tomato that rolled under his blanket and he kicked it to a squash in sleep, although I hadn't been asking anything.
That hostel's just another Bellamy Isle with all around reading your thoughts before you had the time to finish them. 
However, what simple explanations could sometimes have incomprehensible, at first glance, facts.

Autumn came into its own.
I inserted glass into the window frame of one room in our would-be flat, however, they still had brought no asphalt.

And so it went its everyday way until the moment when the chief engineer came from Vapnyarka and said I was announced wanted at the all-Union scale and the mining management received a letter from the NGPI with accusations of sheltering a runaway from working off at the place of his appointment.
‘So, write the application.’
‘Which application?’
'To be fired at your own volition.’
‘I have not such wish.’
‘We cannot keep you here after that letter.’

As I persistently negated any wish to leave, a compromise was found, on the basis of one of many articles in the code of labor legislation, ‘dismissal by agreement of the parties’.
Thus, instead of the chosen, I became just a party. 

In the end, I had a parting walk around Odessa in the sheepskin coat open wide, like a soldier from the Peasant Army of Makhno, and in rubber boots bravely splashing across the puddles from the recent heavy rains.

Then in the hostel, I packed them in a bale with the rest of my clothes and the tools I had already started to acquire one by one – a hammer, an ax, a saw, an iron, an electric boiler, and a white enamel kettle. 

When I bought the kettle from Odessa I had to sing songs all the way from New Dophinovka to the hostel so that it would not get too spooked. 
It was very late, and the night was too dark, as in the abandoned shafts without the flashlight. 
I had to fit from memory into the bends of the country road groping for it with my feet.

I took the bale to the station to send it by train.
Then I returned to the hostel where a recently bought briefcase and sports bag Aerobica were sitting together with the guitar before going to the airport next morning.

Slavik Aksyanov dropped into our room.
We ate a whole pan of fried potatoes under ‘The Bolero' by Ravel from Vasya's receiver. 
I told Slavik to fix the door to the toilet booth above the sea inlet.
It was kicking back in the tall grass, I had seen it there.
He swore to do my last request.
However, just in case, I threatened that if he did not, I would haunt him like the ghost of Hamlet's father. 
A genuine fright flashed in his eyes.
Who would have ever imagined that even they were afraid of spooks! 

Eera told that they sent a letter from Transcarpathia to the institute informing about my absence from the appointed school.
Gaina Mikhailovna was summoned to Rector, who demanded to disclose my current location. 
After Rector declared that in summer he had met me in Odessa, she was forced to give away my affiliation with the mine. 
Now she was going to have troubles at work and my diploma would be taken away unless the Republican Ministry of Education annulled my appointment.

I had to urgently go to Kiev, as far as metro station named after Karl Marx and up the street starting from the October Revolution Square to a gray-stone building in a row of similar to it, yet different to them by its sign of Ministry of Education, and up the white steps of polished marble to a tall leather-lined door on the second floor.
The head of the department in charge of shirkers, named Baranov, looked five years older than me and superbly refined with the adequate chiseling, grinding and polishing as required by his position.

The only chink in his armor was the lone hair on the shoulder of his jacket over a thin woolen waistcoat, with a glimpse of the striped necktie over finely crisscrossed shirt – impierceable coat of mail. 
He trotted it out that our state for four years bore expenses to give me the free education and it was time to compensate by honest work in Transcarpathia or say goodbye to my diploma. 

My defense was built on my passionate desire to work in the field of enlightenment of the younger generations and nowhere else but on the slopes of the Carpathian Mountains, yet how about my family? 
He encouraged me to take you and Eera over there.
And what about the second, or rather, first of my daughters?
The presence of Lenochka was a surprise for him.
By the force of inertia, he suggested sending her together with everybody else. 
I had to show my passport that she was a product of my previous marriage and to confess bitterly to the lack of information as to her mother's whereabouts. 
That was the checkmate.
Grandmaster Baranov had not been trained to parry such moves and, having got to Zugzwang, admitted that I had a really swirly plot.
I would get a free diploma, that is the cancellation of my obligations to return my debt to the state by honest work at the place I was appointed to, if I presented the reference from Head of Street Committee, that Lenochka did live at 13 Decemberists, Konotop City. 

Meanwhile, the bale sent from Odessa arrived in Nezhin. 
The tools did not impress my father-in-law but he got delighted with a teapot strainer.
It was his long-term dream to have such a one, only you could not find it in stores even for ready money. 

Eera and I started discussing at which of the construction enterprises of Nezhin should I apply for a job to get an apartment as soon as possible when she suddenly said that I needed to be checked.
So advised her mother.
I was a little surprised because of a medical check being the must when you applied for a job even without her mother advice. 

Well, I had to understand that there was a need for special examination, to check if I was normal, see?
Certain traits in my behavior instilled some fears and threatened to disrepute the otherwise respectable family of Eera’s parents in the public eye.

For instance, recently I had a walk in torn shoes, and I also collected every mote of dust around your baby carriage, and any question, even of the most basic nature, caused me to think too long before to answer it, and, when she was in the hospital, I came home in the middle of the night and declared that the rain was warm.
In addition, Eera was shocked by the news from Konotop about my fanatical autodafe of the hemp plantation, which, though not included in the list of deviations, spoke volumes. 

I had no counter-arguments, she was right on all the points. 
Shortly before that talk, on a clear peaceful autumn day, I went out for a walk wearing my shoes. 
They were not torn, of course, but fairly worn-out along the sidewalks of Odessa and country roads in the adjacent Komintern district. 

The walk inspired an elegiac mood. 
I remembered the distant galaxies on the smooth sea surface under the steep cliffs near Vapnyarka, the endlessly long street of Kotovsky's Road, and the ridiculously short one of Sholem Aleichem walked along in the same brown leather shoes with longitudinal incut pieces in their toe caps. 
They were sort of a spaceship returned from an expedition to the other end of the universe – still alive, but not fashionable… 

When I was kicking them off in the hallway, Gaina Mikhailovna remarked that it was time to use some warmer footwear.
I felt really pleased with such caring attentiveness from my mother-in-law. 

I could not deny my being slow in answering questions.
Each of them fired up a rumbling computer in my mind (although I did not know then even the word ‘computer') to assess the combinatorial variations of all the possible responses and choose such one from them that would not lose its validity even in the most incalculable future. 

(...an idiot!
All that, in fact, was required:
‘A? Yes...’…)

As for the entrenched defense around your carriage, I have already mentioned it.

Yet, at that time I never thought of debating or proving anything—especially since I had no excuses for the warm rain and the burnt down hemp—so I just went where Eera told me to go with her.

That was a corridor on the second floor of an unfamiliar building with wide floorboards painted red.

The place was rather crowded.
There hanged a sheet of Whatman paper with a picture executed with crayons in the technique of ‘The Merry Pictures' magazine where a kettle addressed the washcloth with the question: 
‘Why did you tell the saucer I was a colander?’
Most likely a gift from some art lover patronizing the institution.

The picture was contemplated joyfully by a young man in the army officer pea-jacket without any insignia.
He wore his forage cap tilted a sliver of a notch on a screwballish side.

Eera entered one of the offices to state complaints.
Then they called me in but no conversation followed.
The doctor, addressing Eera, announced he was not competent for the like cases and I should be examined in Chernigov.

(...exactly as my father used to say:
‘They are sitting there, getting their salary but when you turn to them – “I’m not Copenhagen!” is all they say!..)

The Chernigov psychiatric hospital was located four kilometers from the city. 
The bus stop was named exactly same way: ‘The 4th kilometer’.
Its vast territory was surrounded by a high concrete wall with the gate conveniently not far from the stop.
It was a large complex of buildings in the modern huge-block architectural style which could adorn the city were it no so far away.

We went into the yard of red-tiled buildings of various height; some of them were bridged with indoor galleries or connected with lower structures.
Eera was obviously oppressed by that Bau Stile. 
To tell the truth, I also was always in favor of the works by architect Corbusier.

I escorted dejectedly silent Eera to the needed building.
We were accepted in a small one-window office by a dark-haired woman in a white robe named Tamara… er… Tamara… well, I am sorry, her patronymic has escaped my mind.

At the desk by the window, there sat a sportsman looking man also in white.
When I was asked by Tamara about my preferences in music, he started prompting:
‘Variety it is!’
I realized that he was there not just to ensure Tamara’s security if I were a violently deviated case.
So I had to honestly admit there were more than one – Ella Fitzgerald and Johann Sebastian Bach.
Because I do not drive a fool about the things that really matter.

Tamara told Eera that deviations of my kind were not dangerous, however, if so was Eera’s wish and if I did not mind, then they would keep me for some more close observation.

I did not mind, only warned that on Saturday it was my brother’s wedding to which Eera and I had been invited and, with Tamara’s permission, I would come back to the 4th kilometer on Monday.
Upon my word of honor.

Tamara concurred and saw us out into the corridor. 
From behind the glass door on its end, there came a muffled noise of a multitude of people. 

By that time my brother Sasha had already moved from PMS to KhAZ and was working on some sophisticated milling-grinding machine. 

The KhAZ was not the KhAZ itself, but only a branch of the Kharkov Aviation Plant.
They did not assemble any planes at the branch, but produced spare parts of most different configurations, packed them in boxes and sent to KhAZ or to its other branches in some other cities.

In Konotop the KhAZ branch was named, for shortness, just KhAZ and everybody was eager to get a job there because of high wages.
Sasha earned 200 rubles a month!
The rest of the workers got lower payment because there was just one machine of so high high-precision.

Another advantage of KhAZ was its location in the Settlement, you could come home for the midday break and have your havvage.
Unfortunately, there was a drawback too, KhAZ made you work longer than just eight hours a day. 

No, there were no labor legislation violations.
Sasha left his working place at five sharp, but his work overtook him even at home. 
He complained to me that even watching football on TV, he contemplated his working plans for the next day: which spare parts to work on in the morning, and which after the midday break.
I felt sorry for my brother, but there was nothing I could help him with.

In the Settlement, earning 200 rubles a month, you could start up a family of your own without hesitations.
Sasha’s chosen one, Lyuda, worked at ‘The Optics’ store in the Zelenchuk area and she was also from the Settlement.
Besides, she was a really enviable bride having two huttas, or rather, each of her estranged, but not divorced parents had a separate one.
Which guaranteed a young family immediate solving the problem of housing one way or the other.
Who would not choose to live in clover?
So my brother became an Acceptee.

Eera planned to buy bed linen as the wedding present, but all the traces of such goods had long disappeared from the stores.
It was explained by the fact that the following year Moscow was going to host the World Olympics and the mentioned commodity would be needed for doing beds in the Olympic Village. 

(...in a forward flashing, I can tell that two years later bedding remained a sharp deficit.
I cannot imagine what those guest sportspersons were doing with it in the Olympic Village…)

So, as the wedding present Eera bought a nice jug of red transparent glass, wisely reasoning, that the bed sheets would wear out very quickly but the jug—if not broken—could stand in the cupboard until the golden anniversary.

Since the wedding happened to coincide with our mother birthday, I wanted to present her with flowers. 

Gaina Mikhailovna insisted that no flowers could be bought on November 24, but I went to the bazaar all the same.

On the bridge over the Oster, I saw a man holding a bouquet in his hands in a company of two ladies. 
They were just standing there looking anything but traders.
However, I felt their presence on the bridge was no accident, came up and asked if he would sell me the flowers.

My mother-in-law’s bewilderment had no limits, but I knew that somewhere around Odessa or in the worlds parallel to it I had done something right which was not forgotten by the grateful allies.

We went to Konotop by 15.15 local train.
The wedding party took place in a three-room hutta on Sosnowska Street in the Settlement.
The flowers caused surprise even there.
The surprise became more when I gave them not to the bride.
Then Sasha remembered what day it was and assured the guests it was okay.

The following was a traditional Settlement wedding of an Acceptee.
The only difference that at the party I kicked off smoking.
It happened when a neighbor at the table started to convince me of the impossibility of giving up the habit especially at a party of any kind. 
I put out the lighted cigarette and that was all there to it.

(...I am a non-smoker even now…)

The next morning at 13 Decemberists, Eera announced my intended trip to the 4th kilometer by Chernigov. 
There followed a stormy exchange of views with my parents.
They opposed the very idea of the trip and demanded cancellation of it.
No matter how hard I tried, they could not understand that I had promised to be there on Monday.
How to survive in a world where you could not rely even on your own word?

Eventually, Eera took sides with my parents and they continued convincing me together.
Only Lenochka was silent sitting in the corner of the sofa.

‘What? Educated him for your own misery?’ my father reproached my mother.
Then he turned to me.
‘We've done all that we could for you. Now it's your turn. Do as we ask you. Or we're not what you wanted? What are our wrongs? Tell it!' 
‘Okay, I will!' answered I and tapped my fist on the top of the table. ‘Why did you stop writing poetry?' 
There was a sharp change in my father’s attitude.
He was turning his eyes in embarrassment from his wife and daughter-in-law.
Even in the deep wrinkles on his forehead, there was an unseen before shyness. 
‘Well… I was young… it was the war then...’

(...here’s life, huh?
You start to drive a fool and unexpectedly run across a frank confession… 
By now he gave up the poetry completely.
He switched over to oratory.
In long winter evenings, he puts his felt boots on and goes out to the meeting of neighbors of his age under the lamp on the post nearby the Kolesnikov's hutta. 
And there they stand on the trampled snow, discussing the news from yesterday’s news program ‘Time’, hotly debating whether Muammar Gaddafi’s a manly man or the same clown as Yasser Arafat?..)

As a compromise, they decided that before leaving for Chernigov I would go with my mother to a local psychiatrist Tarasenko from whom (here my father narrowed his eyes) no one could get hooked off. 

Then I escorted Eera to the station and all the way there she tried to persuade me not to go to the 4th kilometer.
But my word to Tamara had been spoken and past recalling.

In the light large building of the Konotop Medical Center, not far from the Avanguard stadium, people were crowding next to each door and only the door to the office of Tarasenko the psychiatrist had no one around.
When my mother and I entered his office, Tarasenko explained the phenomenon by the low awareness of the population. 
There, overseas, every fourth citizen visited a psychiatrist.

Tarasenko's office was equipped with his assistant nurse and the standard medical office's furniture. 
However, the furniture was arranged very strangely. 
The oddity was created by the positioning of the desk. 
Besides being put in the center of the room, it was also turned the wrong way, with its drawers to the door.
I was asked to sit down at the desk.
My mother sat on a chair by the wall and the medical team of two stood on either side of the desk.

I did not like this disposition intended to inflate my megalomania—you sit there like Chairman Mao and those in white are standing around as an errand-boy with an errand-girl.
So, I pushed the chair a bit back from the desk, turned it 90 degrees and, stretching my legs out, put one foot on the other in the posture of a kicking off cowboy. 

And now Tarasenko and his partner rushed to pull and slam back the desk drawers with bang and crash. 
Getting to so violent a company I, naturally, pulled my legs back but kept sitting, also I pricked my ears up. 
What’s on?

Making sure that I hadn't jumped out of the door, neither tried to climb the window blinds, Tarasenko stopped the test and announced that I was as healthy as a bull. 
‘Tell it to him!’ exclaimed my mother, sobbing.
‘He wants to go to the psychiatric hospital in Chernigov!’
‘What for?’
‘His wife has sent him there!’
‘Is she a doctor?’
‘No!’
‘Why then? People can send you anywhere. Is he her slave, or what?’
‘Yes! Yes! He’s a slave!’

(...look here, Joseph Yakovlevich, aka the Beautiful, you was sold into slavery by your brothers, okay? 
How would you like it being sold by your own mother?..)

Tarasenko once again ordered me, already as a slave, not to go anywhere and I together with my mother left his office.

On the way to the tram stop, my mother asked:
‘Now, you see? Got convinced?’
‘It does not change anything.’
‘If they do anything to you, I’ll kill her!’ said my mother with a sob.
‘Mom,’ said I, ‘what kind of book have you recently read?’
Of course, I knew perfectly well that my mother stopped reading books a long time ago, but you have to give some response to maintain a conversation.

Because of the check with submitting me into slavery and inconsistencies in the train traffic timetables, I reached the 4th kilometer by Chernigov late in the evening.
However, the stipulated Monday was not over yet and I started to knock at the iron gate rising discontent yells from the securities in the check entrance house. 
They switched on the light and asked what was my wish.
Tamara's name became the password. 

Two more orderlies in blue flannel gowns came up and took me to the waiting room.
There I gave up my clothes and received pajamas in exchange and a pair of army kirza boots.
The left boot was my size, but the right one squeezed the foot mercilessly.
Probably, that was a retaliation for disturbing them at so late an hour.

Then through the cold darkness, I was taken to the fifth unit and handed over to the paramedic on duty. 
He led me into a wide empty corridor dimly lit, because of the late hour, with a pair of shaded lamps on the wall reflected in the dark glass of a distant window in the opposite end of the corridor. 
Glazed doors to the wardrooms were lined along the left wall. 

The paramedic escorted me into one of the wardrooms, pointed at a free bed and went out. 
In the dim light through the glass of the door, I could make out half a dozen of bed laid with wrapped up figures and ghostly nightstands in between. 
I undressed and lay down suppressing involuntary fear.

Apparently, so late addition made the population of the ward to hide away under their blankets, but, gradually, they thawed out.
Someone invisible asked me from out of the corner if it was me.
They hush-hashed at him and he fell silent.

I refrained from answering.
Through the glass door, there came a faraway cry from down the corridor and cut off too. 
I lay—a wrapped up figure as everyone else—rejoicing that I still managed to do it on Monday, and felt the upsurging alertness because I understood who I was among. 
‘So what, Kostya, would you like some home-made sausage now?’ asked one of the invisible figures of his invisible partner.
I was tickled with irresistible laughter.
How quickly they had figured me out!.
 
When Eera and I were leaving Chernigov after our joint visit to the 4th kilometer, Eera bought a coil of home-made sausage at the station.
It was really delicious.

Now, the brainstorming team in the darkness entered an expert discussion of that very sausage and I, amused by their getting on track so casually, tried to choke the laughter and snuffle it away through the nostrils biting the corner of my pillowcase so that they would not take me for a psycho. 
At some point, I could not hide it anymore and they froze in a frightened silence... 

The morning began with the shuffling of slippers in the wide corridor.
With a yoke from a waffle tower around my neck, I went out in kirza boots and, following the mainstream of the traffic found the washroom and toilet. 
Then there was a usual havvage for breakfast.

When doctors arrived from the city, Tamara looked into the huge corridor and called me by my last name.
I approached her with apologies for being late on Monday.
She forgave me and returned to her parts.

The huge corridor society was populous, diversified and in a state of noisy Brownian movement.
Absolutely unsystematic.
Apart from me, only one individual with his hair closely cropped in zek style wore boots.
He, for the most part, lay on the floor tiles around the white radiators of central heating under the window sill in the far end of the corridor.
Time and again he was pressing himself against the other patient’s backside, who also was lying there.
The addressed one silently pushed him away with a languid motion of a hand.

The mobile part of the crowd roamed around in their slippers, immersed in their individual inner worlds and occasionally emerged from there with some incomprehensible exclamations.
A cripple on a low trolley navigated the stream of their wandering legs propelling himself with his hands pushes against the floor.
He obviously supervised some part of the society capable of understanding instructions and orders and served a hub for their hangout in the style of a black market.

A pair of Mssrs. Pretty-Guys kept together.
The dark-haired one showed himself off as the master-thief in their milieu of two.

A young man of Central Asian appearance invited me to play checkers at a table in the far corner. 
Every eye in his face moved independently from the other, as happens when the brain hemispheres do not interfere in the sovereign internal affairs of the neighbor and each one controls their own eye.

The guy obviously could not play checkers and when there remained just one piece of his on the board I announced the draw and did not play anymore. 

And I did not play cards with the Mssrs. Pretty-Guys.

In the other end of the corridor by the window between the locked door to the courtyard and the glazed door to the passage with medical offices, a white figure of a nurse sat in a chair. 
She never intervened with anything.
She rose from her throne only after the midday havvage to stately walk along with the gurney arrived from the passage to the center of the corridor.

‘Medication!’ sounded joyful cries from different parts of the crowd.
They rushed to form a cluster around the movable table, grabbing up their favorites from the pills of different color and size scattered over the oil-clothed top. 

Soon after some glassy-eyed appeared in the crowd.
The exchange transactions at the black market grew more animated.

To pass the time I followed the example of Lenin and Dean Reed measuring their cells with steps from end to end.
I was lucky to have much more space and orbited the huge corridor in a swaying ellipse from the window in one end to the window by the locked door in the other.
Being not alone in the space I was careful to avoid collisions, especially since I walked at a rapid pace.
Some in the crowd paid attention.

The blonde one from Mssrs. Pretty-Guys started up the Indian drums beat against the cover of a thick book, that he constantly kept in his armpit, accentuating the footfalls of my boots.
‘Why are you driving a fool? You need it?’ shouted the dark-haired one in my wake.
‘Try it yourself, you’ll get high!’ I shouted back, scudding to the other end.

One of the activists in the Brownian movement by the walls suddenly got it.
He issued a happy scream and also started running regular ellipses of an orbit, though not along, but across the corridor.

‘Ogoltsoff infected Baranov!' squeaked some rat from the crowd to the queen in her chair. 
But she did not intervene in anything.
 
Walking was painful because the right boot was borrowed from the torture kit of the Inquisition – a ‘Spanish boot' two sizes smaller than mine. 
I managed to withstand just one day and on the second one decided that was enough for playing Andersen's Mermaid and turned to the nurse with the complaint. 
She gave me a pair of slippers, like on the rest of the patients only more worn-out.
Yet orbiting became painless.

One weakness breeds another.
You start to fix one unbearable sore and there crop up a pack of others.
The button on the pajama pants belt kept slipping out of its too wide slit.
I grew tired of living with my hand clutching pants top for them not to fall down. 
And again I had to bring the nurse out of her non-involvement lethargy with the request for a needle and a thread. 

No sooner had the repair been over than another nurse appeared from the medical offices' passage and called the roll of those starting to the club. 
My name was there too.

For a considerable stretch of time, our caravan of the twelve in pajamas went after the nurse in white yet the concluding patient in our single file was in a black padded jacket of a workman. 

Passing the stairs we entered the long indoor gallery bridging to another building.
Outside the windows stretched withered fields with a distant row of black-and-yellow arrow-shields indicating the direction towards the out-of-sight airfield. 
On the windowsills there stood pots with cacti accompanied with the handwritten instruction for those meek of heart and ignorant of agriculture:
‘Do not water cacti!’

It turned out to be a classically standard club with the stage in front of the hall of rows of seats and the visual agitation posters on the walls:
‘Bread is the head of anything else!’
‘The economy should be economical!’
‘If there is bread, there will be a song!' 
And the citations printed in smaller typesets.

The workman from the end of our file pulled up at the nearest to the entrance citation, and studied it unswervingly and only at times scratched the cap upon his head for which purpose he had to free his hands locked in their zek style clasp on his back. 

I sat down in the last row of seats.
The lamps above the stage lit up and a man in a white robe came on it with a displeased countenance and accordion.
Two more nurses brought in another caravan – a dozen of women in gray robes over the linen of their underwear.
Two or three of them proceeded to seats in the middle of the hall and were immediately joined by Mssrs. Pretty-Guys.

The accordionist started to play for the dancers in the passage between the stage and the front row of seats.
A woman of about forty swiftly paced along the central aisle carrying her sweet smile to the last row and invited me for the white dance.
‘Sorry, I'm no good at the waltz.' 
She went away with her face dropped down.
A loss. A loss.

Despite the purpose of the Strauss's ‘The Danube Waves’ no one was waltzing but just hugging each other in pairs.
Two pairs climbed onto the stage.
In one of them, there was the young man with asynchronous eyes. 
But now both of them were fixed on the tall soft fluff of the gray mohair hat of his partner – a nurse in a white medical coat.
Who of them invited who?

The ladies were first to be taken away, then our caravan started.
The workman broke away from the citation poster and took his concluding place in the file without unclasping his eternal zek hand-hitch.

Besides orbiting the corridor and the visit to a ball in the club, I was also reading.
I asked the blonde one from Mssrs. Pretty-Guys to lend me the book from his armpit which he at times used as a drum, and he willingly concurred.

It turned out to be a book of stories by Tamaz Chiladze translated from Georgian.
I liked them, but in original they, probably, were better.

On the third day, I was sitting by the window next to the locked door to the yard where the first snow was descending in slow quiet flakes. 
I looked at it and read the once read ‘The Judge and Executioner' by Durrenmatt. 
Behind me, all this modern world was romping and fussing and rumbling and mumbling and stumbling in the cross-section reflection by the fifth unit of the fourth kilometer.
I had already been fed up with it.

But I did not have time to finish reading, there was a knock on the window glass from outside.
On the thin soft snow cover, Eera stood and smiled at me. 
Silent snowflakes slowly swirled around her face.
So beautiful.

The nurse brought my clothes and I entered the wardroom to change.
When I returned to the corridor that particles of society who retained a more close connection with now and here were astounded by my leaving them so soon. 
Someone, hiding his identity behind the Brownian movement, shouted angrily that it’s not right to let me out, but I’m sure it was not Baranov because he’s a cheerful guy.

Excited by the freedom at hand, I took a step forward and shouted out that I was grateful to everyone for everything and I promise to remember.
In response, a spontaneous rally broke out, but I already stepped out in the offices’ passage.

On the way to Tamara's, I saw in one of the rooms a lonely old woman in a dressing gown and a head kerchief. 
Crawling on all fours on the floor, she was lining large blocks, the size of a brick, in two rows.

Tamara told Eera that my treatment had not started yet, but as she was insisting so much then let her take me and not be too worried, the deviations of the sort I had were a commonplace thing among Ph.D. degree people. 
That was her way of consoling Eera.

(...that trap did not work for me, by that time I had already found an effective way of keeping my megalomania in check, but Eera seemed to have believed her.
In any case, two years later she gave me for the birthday present a book by Plekhanov, that guy who brought Marxism to Russia. 
On the back of its hardcover, she wished me to become as clever as he was because she was waiting for that. 
So, she waited at least two years though Freud was talking of just one and a half…)

Turning to me, Tamara prescribed a means of turning back to myself – I should watch the news program ‘Time’ every evening.

In the following several years I firmly kept to her prescription and could already with an accuracy of three days predict a plane crash or arrival of the delegation of the Communist Party of Paraguay in Moscow with a brief working visit.
Then I got tired of it and stopped watching TV justifying myself with the proverb that the humpback would be straightened with his grave and that time I’d be already like everyone else – clean of my leopard spots.

(...yet how beautiful this world is when you look at its roots!

“...the symposium was held under the auspices of UNESCO...”

When you learn that ‘aegis' means a goatskin, and ‘symposium' corresponds to a collective drinking bout, then you get it with an especially acute awareness that in the group jag under the goatskins the prostitute of Unesca is most welcome…) 

‘See how perfect this world is,
Have a look!
Ah, how perfect this world i-i-is!..’


