
Probably, I caught a cold at the holidays and started school later than my classmates because I could not understand what was happening that morning when I finally came to class.
Lessons had not begun yet and after me, the newcomer Malvina-like girl appeared at the door. 
Like the rest of the schoolgirls, she wore the uniform of Queen Victoria style: a brown dress with a white lace collar and a black apron with lush straps on her shoulders.
Stepping over the threshold she stopped and waited expectantly.
The next moment there sounded a multi-voiced cry:
‘The Cow of the Courtyard!’
She dropped her schoolbag on the floor and, wrapping her arms around her head ran along the aisle between the desks and everyone—the boys and the girls—blocked her way, hooting and yelling something in her ears and Yura Nikolaenko ran behind her and rubbed himself at her back like dogs do until she sat down at her desk and hid her face in her hands.
The mayhem ceased only when a teacher entered the classroom with a question;
‘What’s going on here?’
She was as perplexed as me. 
The girl ran out of the classroom without even picking her school bag up from the floor.

The next day we had a class meeting but without that girl.
Instead of her Dad came to the meeting with a red face and shouted that we were rascals and pinched his daughter by the chest.
He demonstrated with his hands the way we had been doing it.
Then the teacher spoke to the meeting that it’s a disgrace for pioneers to goad their classmate as that, and she's also a pioneer like us.
And I felt ashamed even though I hadn't pinched nor goaded anyone. 

The beautiful girl never more came to our class.
Perhaps, she was transferred to the parallel one.

(...the crowd is a merciless beast wrote Avetic Isahakian in his poem about Abu-Lala, but I had seen it before I read it…)

Individual cruelty is not any better than a collective one.
In spring I got another deep scratch witnessing an example of maternal pedagogy in the courtyard.
The afternoon Courtyard was empty when a woman entered it between the corner and our houses heading for the opposite side of the courtyard.
Behind her a six-year-old girl ran wailing with her arm outstretched to the women and repeated the same words with hoarse from wailing and crying voice:
‘Mom, gimme your hand! Mom, gimme your hand!’
Something in that hoarse cry reminded me of Masha’s screeching when they came to slaughter her at Grandma Katya’s in Konotop.
The woman walked on without stopping only at times turned back and with a thin rod whipped the hand pleadingly stretched to her.
The girl wailed louder but did not take away her hand and did not stop crying: 
‘Mom, gimme your hand!’

They crossed the yard and went into their entrance leaving me beset with the unanswerable question – how could such fascist mothers exist in our country?.

Between the left wing of the school building and the high plank fence which separated the school grounds from the surrounding forest, there were beds of the school agronomy lot. 
It’s highly unlikely that the loam mixed with withered pine needles from the rare pines left inside the school territory was capable of yielding any sort of crop.
However, when they announced in the classroom that everyone should come on Sunday to dig up the beds in the school lot I was at school at the appointed hour.
The morning was overcast and Mom discouraged me from going.
Everything turned out just the way she had predicted: not a single soul around.
But maybe they would come?

I didn’t want to loaf by the locked school or hang around at the agronomy lot and I went down to the one-story building of the workshop and our class in the lower part of the school grounds.
Opposite the entrance to the locked building, there was a squat brick warehouse with two gates locked as well. 
However, it turned out that it’s not a big deal to climb up to its roof from a close slope of a steep hillock behind it.
An empty slightly sloping lean-to roof was covered with black roofing felt.
I went around the roof to each of its corners.
Looked back at the empty silent school.
No one.
Five minutes more and I’d go home.

Then the sun shot through the clouds and the waiting became not so gloomy.
Because of I noticed that from the black roof here and there were rising light transparent wisps of steam. 
‘Aha, the sun heat!’ figured I out.
What's more, there began to appear dark-gray color dry streaks on the black felt.
They widened, expanded, joined together.
I was entranced by that expansion of solar possessions.
I knew that no one would show up and I could just leave and go.
Yet, let that stretch of wet roof felt turn dry-gray too so that the island of dry would reach the very edge of the roof. 
I returned home by the midday meal time and didn’t explain to Mom that the sun recruited me to its companions in arms...

End spring Dad was going fishing out of the Zone and he agreed to take me with him if I dug out worms for bait.
I knew some good places for worm-digging and prepared a whole tangle of them; half of a tin can. 
We left very early in the morning and near the Checkpoint were joined by two more men with the same papers of permission to leave the Zone for a whole day till six in the evening.

Beyond the white Checkpoint gate, we turned right and went through the forest. 
We were walking and walking, and walking and the forest never ended.
At times the tread-path we were walking along got near the edge of the forest but then again turned into the wilderness.
I walked patiently because Dad had warned me in advance that we should go eight kilometers and I answered it was Okay with me, I’d do that.
So I walked, though my fishing pole and the tin can with bait grew very heavy. 
Finally, we went out to a forest lake and the fishermen told it was Sominsky.
I didn’t recognize the lake though it was in it that I once learned to swim.

We walked along a grassy promontory at the end of which there was a real raft.
One of the fishermen remained on shore and we three boarded the raft.
It was made of logs from deciduous trees in a thin green bark. 
Dad and the other fisherman pushed the raft off and shoving the lake bottom with long poles took it some thirty meters away from the shore.
There we stopped and began fishing.
The raft logs were not very close to each other and in the gaps between them, there were seen the traverse logs drowned in the pitch black depth, so we had to be careful. 

We were fishing with our fishing poles directed in three different sides from the raft.
The catch was not so big as you would think considering their resistance when you were pulling your fishing pole, and around their muzzles and on backs there stuck out prickly spikes.
Dad said it's the ruff, and the fisherman added that the most delicious fish soup is cooked of them. 
Later, when we got ashore and cooked the soup in a pot hanging over the fire I ate all of it, of course, but couldn’t decide how delicious it was: the soup was a bit too steamy and hot.
The fishermen said there was no prospect of good catch anymore because at that time of the day fish is sleeping.
They went under the trees and slept too, the fishermen and my Dad.
When everyone woke up we slowly started back home. 

Returning, we didn't take the shortcut tread-path through the forest, we walked along the hills and valleys because the papers permitted be away till evening. 
From the top of one of the hills, we saw a lake in the distance, a perfectly round lake overgrown with reeds. 
We proceeded to it and Dad wanted, at any rate, to take a swim in it. 
One fisherman tried to talk him out of the idea.
The round lake, called the Witch’s eye, time and again had someone drown in its duckweed.
But Dad doffed his clothes, all the same, grabbed hold of the stern of a small boat near the shore and kicking up foamy splashes went off to the opposite one. 
Halfway through, he remembered the watch on his wrist, took it off and hung on a nail in the stern. 
When he came back long wisps of duckweed were thickly stuck onto his shoulders. 
When he already was on the shore and putting on his clothes, we saw a woman in a long skirt of village women running across the slanted field with unclear yells. 
She ran up to us but didn’t say anything new, just repeated what we had heard from the fellow-fisherman.
Near the Checkpoint, we got in a bad weather and got thoroughly wet while we got home but no one fell ill after that... 

With bicycles, I have a friendship since my childhood. 
I can't even remotely remember my first tricycle but some photos confirm: here it is with the pedals on the front wheel and me in its saddle, a three-year-old fat little man in a closely fitting skull cap. 
Yet, I recollect the next one – a red three-wheeler with the chain drive because I often had to argue with my brother and sister whose turn it was to ride it. 
Later, Dad reassembled it into a two-wheeler but after my fifth grade, it became too small for me to ride and irrevocably went over to the younger ones. 

Then my Dad got somewhere a real bike for adults. 
Yes, it was a second-hand one, but not a bike for ladies or some kind of ‘Eaglet’ for grown-up kids.
One evening after his work, Dad even tried to teach me riding it, but without his supporting hand on the saddle, I would fall on one side or the other. 
Dad got tired of my clumsiness and said ‘Learn it yourself!’

In a couple of days, I could already ride it. 
However, I didn't get the nerve to throw my leg over and sit on its saddle, I just passed my leg through the frame and rode it standing on its pedals which caused the bike to run askew. 
But then I got ashamed seeing a boy, even younger than me, who was not afraid to run along with one foot put on his bike’s pedal and then flung the other foot over the saddle to the other pedal.
He lacked the length of legs to sit up on the saddle and not to lose the pedals. 
So he rode sitting on the frame with his left then right thigh, alternatively. 
Next to that small but brave kid, riding the bike ‘under the frame’ was just a shame.

And now, finally, after so many tries and falls ending both with bruises and without, I did it! 

Wow! How swiftly the bike carried me over the ground – no one would catch up even if running.
And most important – how easy it was to ride a bicycle!

I could drive for hours along the concrete paths in the courtyard, orbiting its two wooden gazebos.
When it ceased to satisfy anymore, I started to ride along the road of concrete slabs surrounding the two Blocks. 
At higher speeds, the mastering of bike aerobatics began: ‘riding without the handles’, when you take your hands off the steer and pilot the bicycle by feeding your body weight to either side.
And the bike understood!

Another achievement of that summer was developing the ability to open eyes under water. 
The dam where I once slipped off the slab was repaired again producing a wide bathing pool. 
We, boys, played ‘spotting’ in the water when the ‘it’ had to catch up and touch one of the players.
And because the game took place in the water both running away and catching was done by diving.
Underwater, you could change the dive direction and who knows where you’d come up out to the surface.
Before, I always firmly closed my eyes when diving but only with open eyes you could see flashing of white heels of a player.

Under the water, in its yellowish twilight, you can see not very far, but the sounds are heard much more clearly, if, say, you sit underwater and knock two pebbles against each other. 
However, you cannot sit there for a long time – the air in your lungs drags you up to the surface when you do not row your hand and legs into the depth...

That summer my parents went on their vacations in turn. 
First, Dad went to his native village of Kanino in the Ryazan region. 
He took me with him only warned that on the way I did not tell anyone anywhere that we lived at the Atomic Object.

At the station of Bologoye, we had a long wait for the train to Moscow.
Dad went to punch the tickets and I remained sitting on our suitcase in the station waiting room.
On a nearby bench, a girl was sitting with an open book in her lap. 
I walked up to the girl and looked over her shoulder.
It was "The Mysterious Island" by Jules Verne.
I read a couple of paragraphs of the familiar lines I liked so much.
She also read without paying any attention to me standing behind the bench.
I wanted to talk to her, but I did not know what to say.
That that was a good book? That I had also read it?

While I was looking for the right words to say, her adults came and announced that their train was arriving.
They grabbed their things and went out to the platform to board the train.
She never looked back.
Then my Dad returned with the punched tickets.
At my request, he bought me a book from a bookstall about a Hungarian boy who later became a youth and fought against the Austrian invaders of his homeland. 

When the ping-pong echo of the loudspeaker announced the arrival of our train, we went out to the platform. 
A boy about ten-years-old passed by.
‘See? Еhat’s the poverty.’ said Dad to me.
I looked at the boy going away and noticed the rough patches in his pants. 

In Moscow, we arrived in the morning. 
I kept asking when there would be Moscow until the conductor said that we were already in the city.
But behind the window pane of the car, there were the same shabby log huts as at the stations of Valdai, only much more and closer to each other and they did not want to end in any way. 
And only when our train pulled in under the high roof of the station I believed that it was Moscow.

We went on foot to the other station which was very close.
There Dad again punched the tickets but that time we had to wait until the evening, so he handed the suitcase over to the storage room and we went to the Kremlin for an excursion.
In the Kremlin, they warned that we shouldn't take pictures there. 
Dad had to show that was not a camera in the leather case hanging from his shoulder but his homemade radio and I was allowed to carry it on.
There were white-walled houses in the Kremlin and dark fir trees, but very few, although thick and high.

The excursion was brought to the Tsar Bell with a chopped out wall.
It happened when the Tsar Bell fell from the bell tower and couldn’t ring ever since.
That’s a pity.
And when they showed us the Tsar Cannon, I instantly climbed the pile of the large polished cannonballs under her nose and shoot my head into the muzzle. 
There was a lot of dust on the circular wall.
‘Whose kid is that?! Take him away!!’
So cried some man in a gray suit running up from the nearest tree.
Dad admitted that I was his and then, until we left the Kremlin, he held me by the hand all the time. 

When we returned to the railway station, Dad said that he needed to buy a watch, only that's a pity he did have money enough.
Nonetheless, we went to the store where there were lots of different watches under the glass in the counter and Dad asked me which one to buy.
I remembered his complaint about the lack of money and pointed at the cheapest - for seven rubles, but Dad bought an expensive one – for twenty-five...

In the village of Kanino, we lived in the log hut of Grandma Martha which consisted of one large room with two windows and a high Russian stove. 
Behind the hut, there was a log lean-to attached to it. 
It was empty, strewn with wisps of old hay and smelled with dust.
In that lean-to, I found three books: a historical novel about Bagration and the war of 1812, a long story about establishing of the Soviet power among the Indians of Chukchi Peninsula, and ‘The Little Prince' by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. 

Once my Dad’s brother and sister came to visit.
They lived in the same village but were very busy at the collective farm, kolkhoz.
Grandma Martha cooked a round yellow omelet for the occasion.
I don’t remember the meals on other days...

The village of Kanino was divided into two parts by the hollow with a broad slow creek.
Its banks were completely overgrown with the willow. 
And the stream was shallow too – just a bit above the knees with a pleasant sandy bottom.
I liked to wander in its slow current.

Once my Dad took me to the Mostya river.
It was a long-long walk but there was enough of the river to swim from one grassy bank to the other.
There were many people on both banks, probably from other villages.

On our way back we saw a combine harvesting wheat in the field.
We stopped at the edge of the field and when the combine drove past to the other end, Dad angrily said ‘hooey!’
It turned out that the combine driver was cutting the very tops of the spikes to finish his job quicker but when he saw a stranger in a white tank shirt together with a boy of urban appearance he decided my Dad was some chief from the district administration on his vacation and, driving past us, he mowed the spikes at their very roots. 

Near the Grandma Martha's lean-to, there appeared a large haystack when Dad and his brother began some small repair inside her log hut. 
Grandma Martha moved to spend nights in the lean-to and for me and my Dad, the bed was made atop of the haystack. 
Sleeping up there was convenient and pleasant because of the withering grass smell but a bit unusual and even scary for all the stars above you all the time.
Besides, the roosters started crying before the dawn and then you had just to lay in the twilight before dropping off again...

One day I went upstream as far as another village and an earthen dam made by the boy from that village so that you could swim. 
But after that, I fell ill and was taken to the same upstream village because only there was infirmary with three beds. 
On one of those, I was ill almost a whole week reading ‘The Standard Bearers' by Gonchar and eating the strawberry jam brought by Dad's sister, Aunt Sasha. 
So we spent Dad’s vocation and returned to the Object.

Soon after our return, Mom took Sasha and Natasha with her and went on her vacation to Konotop.
Again Dad and I remained as a company of two. 
He cooked tasty pasta soup in a Fleet manner and told things about the seamen life.
For instance, on ships, many commands were given by the trumpet signal. 
Those signals were not just ‘du-du-du-du du-du-du-du’ as made by a pioneer bugler when marching together with a drummer after the Pioneer Company Banner on some ceremonial lining-up.
The ship trumpet plays a different melody for each command. 
At midday meal time the trumpet sings:
‘Take your spoon, and your mess-tin run, run, run to the half-deck'.
The mess-tin is a pot with a lid which they fill with the sailor’s meal.
And the half-deck is the place on a ship where the cook ladles meal out.
Dad taught me some sea words.
‘Topmast’ is the highest point on a boat.
When they want to play a trick on a young sailor they give him a teapot and send after tea from the topmast.
The greenhorn, of course, does not know where it is and walks about the ship asking the way.
The seasoned sailors direct him from one place to another or to the engine room, just for fun.

My Dad also told that some zeks who stayed in a zone for many years can no longer to live in freedom.
One recidivist after serving his term asked the Zone Chief not to let him out and keep in the zone. 
But the Zone Chief replied: 
‘The law is the law! Get away!’
In the evening the recidivist was brought back to the zone because he killed a man in a nearby village.
And the murderer cried:
‘I told you, Chief! Because of you, I took an innocent soul!' 
At those words, Dad's eyes looked sideways and up and even his voice changed somehow...

Some books I re-read several times, not immediately, of course, but after some time.
That day I was re-reading the book of stories about the revolutionary Babushkin, which I was awarded at school for good study and active participation in the school public life. 
He was a mere laborer and worked for rich plant owners before he became a revolutionary.

When Dad called me for the midday meal, I went to the kitchen got seated at the table and, eating the soup, said: 
‘And do you know that the workers at Putilov factory once were forced to work for forty hours at a stretch?’
To which my Dad replied:
‘Do you know that your Mom went to Konotop with another man?’
I raised my head from above the plate.
Dad was sitting in front of untouched soup and looking at the kitchen window.
I was scared, I cried and said:
‘I will kill him!’
But Dad still looking at the window answered:
‘No, Seryozha, we don’t need no killing.’
His voice sounded a little nasal as that of the recidivist murderer.

Then Dad got to the Detachment Hospital and for two days the neighbor woman who moved in the flat of the redundant Zimins was coming to our kitchen to cook meals for me.
On the third day, Mom came back together with my sister and brother. 
Mom went to see Dad at the Hospital and took me with her.

Dad came out to the yard in pajamas which they gave to all the patients in Hospital. 
The parents sat on a bench and told me to go and play somewhere.
I walked away but not too far and I heard as Mom was quickly telling something to Dad in a low voice.
He looked straight in front of himself repeating:
‘The kids will understand when grown up.' 

(...when I grew up, I understood that some informer had sent a letter from Konotop, only that time to my Dad instead of the Special Department.
What for?
Telling on my Mom gave the rat no prospect of getting better housing conditions or other improvements in their day to day life. 
Or maybe just out of habit?
Or maybe that was not a neighbor at all? 
Some people when not happy with their lives think it will help if someone else does badly.
I do not think it works but I know that there are such thinkers.

I never asked my brother and sister about the man who went with them to Konotop that summer.
Nonetheless, now I know that it was so. 

Mom built her defense on Dad’s frivolous behavior during his vacation the previous year when he went alone to a Crimean sanatorium on the admission card from the Trade Union.
He got so light-minded there that never thought to get rid of his light-mindedness evidence and Mom had to wash that evidence out from his underwear in the washing machine ‘Oka’…

Then Dad left the Hospital and we started to live on…)

At school, our sixth form was moved back onto the second floor of the main building.
With reading books and watching the television I had no time for home assignments but still remained a ‘good learner' just out of inertia. 
In the public life, I played the role of a horse in the performance staged by the pioneers of our school.
I got that role because Dad made a big horse head from cardboard and on stage I represented the horse's head and forelegs.
My hands and shoulders were concealed by a large colorful shawl under which there was one more boy in a deep bow position grasping my belt from behind who played the role of the hinder-parts.

The horse in the scene did not say anything and appeared in the dream of the sleeping idler only to intimidate him so that he began to study well.
We performed in the school gym, and in the Regiment Club, and even went on a tour out of the Zone – to the village club of Pistovo. 
The appearance of the horse everywhere sparked vivacity among the audience...

Besides the movies at the Regiment Club, I sometimes went to the House of Officers – my parents gave me money for a ticket.
It was there that I first watched the French adaptation of The Three Musketeers.
A thick crowd gathered in the vestibule in front of the auditorium before the film.
Bad rumors circulated among the people.
That the film was not brought and they would show something different instead so that not to lose sold tickets.
On the wall of the vestibule there hung a huge portrait of Marshal Malinovsky with all his orders and medals on.
There were so many of them, no free space left on the tunic – the awards like an all-over coat of mail hung down even below the belt. 
Looking at the chain-mailed marshal, I thought that I wouldn’t watch anything else, although the money for the ticket was already given.
But the alarm turned out to be false and the happiness lasted, under the ringing sounds of swords, the whole two sequels, in color!.. 

Exploration of the Detachment Library developed successfully.
Not only that I had long ceased to get frightened by the pictures in the wide hallway, I became a real shelf-hanger.
As the shelving of books crowded quite close, I got the hang of climbing to the very top putting my feet on the shelves both sides of the narrow passages.
I wouldn't say that on the previously unreachable shelves there were some special books, no; however, the acquired skills of mountaineering increased my self-esteem. 

I felt the same when Natasha called me to distract from sofa-readings because there was an owl in the basement of the corner building.
Of course, I immediately ran after her.
The basement corridor was illuminated by a single bulb that survived the harsh times of the crook wars.
At the end of the corridor under the opening to the outer pit there sat a large bird on the floor – much bigger than an owl. 
Some real eagle owl.
He shook his eared head with the crooked nose.
No wonder that the kids did not dare to approach. 

I acted without a moment’s hesitation or thinking it over as if I encountered eagle owl every other day.
I took off my shirt and threw it over the bird’s head.
Then I grasped its clawed legs and lifted it from the floor.
The owl didn’t resist under the cover of my tartan shirt.
Where to now?
Of course, I took it home, especially since I was not fully clad. 

Mom didn’t agree to keep such a big monster at home although our neighbors the Savkins had a hefty crow in their flat.
Mom answered that Grandmother Savkin's main preoccupation was all day to wipe up crow guano all over their flat. 
And who would do it in ours when all of us were at work and at school? 
Reluctantly, I promised the next morning to take the eagle owl to the Living Nature Room at the school where a squirrel and a hedgehog lived in their cages. 
Meanwhile, let him sit in the bathroom.

For the eagle owl's refreshment, I took to the bathroom a crust of bread and a saucer filled with milk. 
He sat in the corner on the tiled floor and did not even look at the food.
Going out I turned off the light, hoping that he would find it in the dark because it's a night predator. 
In the morning I saw that the eagle owl did not touch anything of his supper.
After breakfast, I gripped his bare legs and carried him to school.

Probably, owls do not like hanging upside down because that eagle owl all the way tried to bend his head up as far as the neck let go.
Sometimes I gave my schoolbag to my brother and carried the bird with my both hands in the normal position.

When the distant view of the school opened from the hillocks top, the owl's head dropped and I realized that he was dead. 
I felt even relieved that he wouldn’t have to live in the captivity of smelly Living Nature Room.
I left the path and hid him in the bushes because once I saw a hawk hanged from a thick bough of the old tree on the Bugorok-Knoll.
I didn’t want they feathered or somehow mutilate my owl even dead as he was...
Later Mom said that probably he died of old age that’s why he got to the basement.
