
(...but I think all that happened so that we would have met each other.
He was a messenger to me, only that I haven’t yet understood the message.
Birds are not just birds and ancient augurs knew that…

My house in Stepanakert is located on the slope of a deep ravine behind the Maternity Hospital.
The last house in a dead end, a very quiet place indeed.
Once coming home I saw a bird in the grass about the size of a sparrow.
It trailed through the grass with fumbling unsteady steps as if severely wounded, and dragged its wings behind it.
Giving it a passing look I went on burdened with too many problems of mine own.
The next day I learned that at the same moment a young man was butchered in the ravine.
Dope-fiends’ squabble.

That small bird was the soul of the murdered and nothing will convince me it's not so…)

In the autumn following the summer of separate vacations, our family became fans of mushroom harvesting excursions. 
Of course, mushrooms were everywhere just a couple of steps to any side away from the school path and there’s russula growth for you, or solid portabella, long-legged enoki, let alone oily agarics.
Only that the busy passers-by had no time for mushrooms.
But when they give you the permission to leave the Zone for a whole Sunday and provide a truck to take the mushroom pickers to the out-of-the-Zone forest the 'noiseless hunting' starts looking more attractive.

Perhaps, all those conveniences were established earlier for the Object dwellers only my parents did not use them until they needed a firmer reconciliation after the split summer.

(...I did not think about such things then and was just happy to go with my parents to a forest for mushroom harvesting…)

Dad made special pails of cardboard, light and capacious.
In the forest, the mushroom pickers parted and wanderer everybody by themselves exchanging at times distant echoes of ‘ahoy!' 
I liked watchful walking in a silent autumn forest, wet from the drizzle and fog.
Of course, we didn't pick russulas – too fragile, but portabella or agarics were a good find. 
Dad made a small knife for each of us so as not to spoil the mycelium. 
Besides, on the cut, it's seen at once whether the mushroom had worms or not. 
The best of the mushrooms is ‘the white', or porcini, but I never came across any of them. 
The unknown ones I took to Dad and he explained – those were shiitake, or morels or mere throwaways. 
At home, the mushrooms were poured in a big basin and flooded with water 
Then Mom cooked or marinated them.
All that was delicious, no doubt, but hunting them in the woods was much more delightful.

One Sunday when the parents went on a visit somewhere, the three of us began to have fun and chase each other all over the apartment.
The game was ended by the knock at the door.
There stood the new neighbors from the first floor.
They said that parents’ absence is not the reason for mayhem starting and on their return they would be told that we could not behave ourselves in their absence.
Later in the evening, Natasha came running for the landing to announce the alarm: the parents were already coming but the neighbors from the apartment beneath us stopped them with complaints. 
Oh-oh, we're going to be let have it!

How come she was at the right time in the right place?
Very easy. 
Because the landing was the continuation of the apartment and it was so wide that we could play balloon-volleyball there. 
And Mom even started going out there in the evenings, when she was not at work, to jump skipping rope.
We followed her example, but I wasn't too good at it. 

When the parents entered the hallway, Dad's face was very angry.
Without taking off his coat, he went to the kitchen and brought a stool to the parents' room.
He moved the carpet aside and smashed the stool against the floor.
‘Keep quiet, eh?!’ shouted he to the floorboards and banged them again with the stool.
‘Now, Okay?’
I realized that we would not be punished, but something still was somehow wrong.

When leaving for school we took with us sandwiches in our school bags.
Mom wrapped them in newspaper sheets so that during a break we would take them out and eat.
For Sasha and Natasha, she made one package for both because they studied in the same class. 
And before going to school we also had breakfast in the kitchen.

But that Saturday I left for school without my school bag and alone.
The senior classes were playing a military game that day and the junior kids got a day off on that account.
The participating classes were divided into two groups: ‘Blues’ and ‘Greens’.
For a start, the ‘Blue' and ‘Green' troops would march into the forest in different directions. 
The goal was to track down the enemy, surprise them and take away their banner.
Each trooper had to have paper shoulder straps of the color denoting who he belonged to.
When the shoulder straps got torn off in the game, the trooper was considered killed, one missing shoulder strap meant being a prisoner of war.

In the morning I came to the kitchen late for breakfast. 
Firstly, I was not as usual awakened by the rise of the younger ones – they did not have to go. 
Secondly, the previous night I was busy sewing the shoulder straps with short frequent stitches to my jacket so that they would sit tight and not be easily torn off and for that reason, I went to bed late. 
Mom was already leaving for her work and said there was some pasta remained from the previous day or, if I wanted, I could cook myself an egg for breakfast.
I said that I did not know how to cook an egg, but she answered it’s as easy as pie: to have a soft-boiled egg you boil it for a minute and a half and three-minute boiling makes it hard-boiled.
She even brought the alarm-clock from their room and put it on the windowsill next to the mushroom jar before leaving hurriedly.

The mushroom in the jar had nothing to do with the forest.
Such mushrooms were kept in almost every kitchen of the Object.
It floated in three-liter jars like a piece of greenish slime.
The water in those jars became pleasant to the taste, like kvass beverage. 
When the drink in the jar was almost ended and the mushroom touched the bottom, the jar was refilled with water and put aside for a couple of days to acquire the taste.
Women were sharing with each other pieces of the mushroom because if it grew too thick and left little room for water. 

I poured water into a pan and loaded it with an egg, lighting the gas under the pan I checked the time by the alarm clock.
After a minute and a half, the water did not look too hot and I decided – Okay, let it be hard-boiled. 
After three minutes some rare wisps of steam were starting to rise from the water and lots of small bubbles gathered on on the sides of the pan and I turned off the gas because I had clear-cut instructions for cooking boiled eggs.

(...the saying that ‘the first pancake is lumpy' can be safely expanded with ‘the first boiled egg is liquid messy'…) 

The participants in the war game were mostly in sportswear and were reluctant to enter the school building.
So all crowded together in the yard in small separate groups.
In mine, everybody appreciated the way my shoulder straps were sewn to the jacket. 
See? No way of grasping the strap, nothing like by those boys who fixed theirs with just a couple of stitches.
Their shoulder straps stuck out like a bridge and asking to be torn off with a little finger.

At that moment some unfamiliar boy, maybe from the parallel class, started a scrap.
He spread me on the ground and tore my shoulder straps in tatters.

(...I never knew how to fight, neither do I now.
Most likely, I just called him ‘fool!’ afterward and went to the forest – back home…)

In the forest, I took off my jacket. 
Instead of the shoulder straps, there remained a narrow frame-like paper strip under the tight close stitches of a black thread.
I plucked the paper scraps out and scattered over the fallen foliage.
Maybe I even cried for resentment of being so unruly and prematurely killed, even before the start of combat actions while I, in fact, dreamed of capturing the enemy headquarters…

Sometimes at the lessons, I drew designs for my secret shelter. 
It was located in a cave, inside an impenetrable rock like those people had in ‘The Mysterious Island’ by Jules Verne.
But to my cave, you could only get by the underground passage which began far from the cliff, in the depths of the forest. 
Well, and in the cave itself, there was still a passage upward, into a smaller cave, where there were narrow crevices in the wall to look out and see what's going on around. 

I drew the designs with a pencil, the reverse end of which was carved into a mask like those stone idols in the Easter Island.
The skill of pencil carving I also acquired at school.
As easy as a pie, all you need is a razor blade.
In the pencil's not pointed tip, you carve out two longitudinal grooves marking both sides of the future nose.
A deep cross cut beneath the grooves unites them and becomes the tip of the nose.
Now, starting one centimeter off the nose tip produce a gradually deepening wide cut up to the nose; it makes the nose to stick out and will be the lower part of the face. 
The notch across that cut is the thin-lipped mouth and two short slits across the long grooves bordering the nose become the eyes.
One more idol from the Easter Island is ready.

But you should be careful about the razor blade, it’s awfully sharp and can cut your fingers.
Such razor blades are usually taken from the tiny paper pack of blades that Dad keeps in the bathroom.
The inscription ‘Neva’ stands on the blue paper of pack together with and the neat picture of a black sailboat.
And each blade in the pack is in a separate blue envelope with the same inscription and picture...

With the start of the winter, the skin on my hands began to peel off.
At first, there formed some small spots of dry skin and, when rubbed and pulled at, it would go off in patches.
I didn’t tell anyone about it and in a week took it all off, like a pair of gloves, up to the wrists.
Only the palms skin remained the same.
And beneath the peeled of patches, there was new skin again...

(..I have no idea if there is some scientific explanation for such a phenomenon, yet, in my humble opinion, the cause of it was in the book I saw on the shelves in the Detachment Library. 
It was titled ‘The Man Is Changing His Skin’.
I didn’t borrow it to read but the title was remembered and, being an impressionable child, I checked the possibility of the announced change…)

 I always had two Achilles’ heels – naivety and impressionability.
Once I was so impressed by a song that wanted to write down its lyrics at any rate, although it was in a foreign language.
My attempt went no further than the first line of which I also was not too sure.
You listened to the record once and heard - ‘esso latsmaderi’ but at the next try it turned into ‘esso dazmaderi’.
But it’s not possible that a recorded disk would change the words on the fly!
And the project remained unaccomplished.

(...many years later I met the song again and recognized it when Louis Armstrong sang: 
- Yes, sir, that’s my lady…)

The skating rink across the road from the very beginning was meant for playing hockey.
In the course of time, it was framed with a low compact fence of planks and two hockey goals put at the field ends. 
After snowfalls, the boys cleared the field with a pair of wide metal sheets resembling the bulldozer blade with a long horizontal handle above it. 
No less than two or three boys were needed for pushing the blades.
The snow was shifted to the fence opposite the locker room shed and shoved out of the field with large snow shovels of plywood.
That's why behind that fence there accumulated a snow hillock along all the field. 
The boys dug long tunnels in that artificial snow mountain.
It became a growing system of tunnels with ramifications, dead ends and all that, like in the blueprint drawings of my secret shelter. 

In the evenings, we played hide-and-seek in those tunnels under the ink-black darkness because the posts with lighting lamps were only on the locker room’s side of the ice rink.
But when you switched a flashlight in a tunnel there appeared white glacial walls with innumerable bright sparks in them...

The year was ending.
Almost no sheets remained there under the shiny black spine of the tear-off calendar on the wall next to the kitchen window.
The tear-off calendars had as many sheets as there were days in a year. 
The sheets were small, about the size of the palm, yet when a year started there was a lot of them giving the calendar such a plump and solid air.
Each day one sheet was torn away with the date printed on it and information about the time of sunrise and sunset and what was the current phase of the moon.
But all that data was printed down the sheet and in the center there was the portrait of one or another Member of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union whose birthday it was or, with no Member born on that day, a picture of this or that hero of the Civil War or the Great Patriotic War.
On the reverse side, you could read their biography, but briefly because of the sheet's small size. 
Once a month or two you could come across a crossword in the calendar and four dates printed in red because they were holidays: New Year, May Day, the Great October Revolution Day, and the Constitution Day. 

But later Mom started to buy tear-off calendars for women where instead of Members' portraits there were pictures of birch-trees with the sewing patterns on the back of the sheet, or recipes for pies and all sorts of useful tips.

The was the advice from which I learned how to wean your husband from his propensity for spirits. 

Pour a quantity of pulverized burnt cork into a glass of wine and treat your husband with it before the arrival of guests.
When the guests gather, the burnt cork will show its effect and the drunkard will not be able to hold the gases in his stomach. 
He’ll start to fart and feel ashamed before the guests and that will make him abandon the disgraceful habit.

I shared the method with Mom because at times she scolded Dad for his propensity. 
However, Mom refused to use the advice. 

(..I couldn’t understand her then – why to complain if you don’t want to eliminate the cause of discomfort?
When I grew up I understood my Mom, but now I cannot understand those who could print such idiocy.

You see, my understanding is like that crane from a fable on a marsh swamp – he pulls his neck out free, but a wing gets bogged down, the wing is out—oops!—a leg got stuck…)

One week before the winter holidays the class teacher announced that at the New Year Eve party there would be held the contest for the best fancy dress and our class should win it, or, at least, try to win.
I was ignited by the task at hand and immediately got the idea of an irresistible carnival dress – no bears or robots anymore, I'd dress up as a gypsy girl! 

Mom laughed when I shared my plan but promised to help because she had connections at the Amateur Dancing Activities.

At my cautious inquiries in the class – who was preparing what for the contest the boys were answering the same: no one would make any fancy dress, everyone will come in their casual wear.
Such dull prospect dismayed me because at a New Year party everything should be like in the movies ‘Carnival Night’ with streamers flying crisscross through the snowfall of confetti.
I tried to convince myself it was just an excess panicking like before ‘The Three Musketeers’ movie show which took place after all.
Well, and if the boys did not want to come in fancy dresses then there were other guys especially from the senior classes who you could rely on.

Mom made a mask for me as that of Mr. X in the movies ‘Mr. X’.
It also was of black velvet, only with the addition of black gauze hanging to the lips.
Now, no one would recognize me because from the Amateur Activities dancers she brought a real wig with a long black braid reaching to the waist, a red skirt, a fine blouse and a black shawl with big red flowers. 
When I changed into all those things, Mom and her new woman-friend who moved into the Zimins' flat were laughing until they were in tears. 
Then they said, what if someone invited me to a dance? I had to have some practice.
On their advice, I picked up a chair and slowly span with it under a waltz from a record.
They laughed even more and said I needed female shoes my boots did not suit the red skirt.
The shoes were also found but they had high heels because you couldn’t wear sandals in winter.
Walking on high heels was very uncomfortable but Mom said ‘bear it, Cossack and get trained while you have the time’.

An hour before the New Year party, my carnival costume was packed in a large bag and I went to school through the dark, almost night forest.
At school, I went up to the second floor, where even the light was not turned on, and in one of the dark classrooms, I changed into my fancy dress. 
Descending to the first floor I held onto the railing because walking in high-heel shoes is no better than if you'd got skates on your feet. 
 
The vestibule and the first-floor corridors were also not lighted in full, yet there was enough light to see that everybody, even the guys from senior classes had come albeit not in the school uniform yet nothing like carnival costumes. 
They stood in groups or ran back and forth and fell silent when I clapped the shoe heels past them on the parquet flooring, then on the tiles of the vestibule and again on the parquet in the next corridor. 
And where was the celebration then? 
Where were the streamers and confetti?

A couple of senior boys talked to each other in a whisper and approached me. 
‘Can you tell the future, gypsy girl?’
At that moment the School Pioneer Leader appeared and took me with her to the gym.
The hall was crowded with rows of seats to the New Year Tree and on both sides of it because on the stage with dark blue curtains, there was going to be performed a play.
In vain had I waltzing that chair at home, there would be no dancing whatsoever. 

The Pioneer Leader seated me in the first row in front of the stage.
Then she left briefly and brought a masked girl in a Harlequin suit: another stupid fool like me.
She was placed in the chair next to me, we were the only mummers in the gym.

The curtain fell open and the ninth grade presented their production of Cinderella.
They had good costumes. 
I especially liked the tartan cap of the Jester.
The performance ended, everyone started to clap and I realized that now even the Jester would change into a jacket and pants.
I left the gym and went upstairs to the dark classroom where I had left my clothes and changed the painful high-heel shoes for my long-desired felt boots. 
What a bliss!
Exiting the school, I met my Mom and Natasha who came to admire my masquerade triumph. 
I briefly explained that there was no carnival and we went home through the same night forest.

(...the main trick for being happy is not to look back and the memory will quickly do its job – it will forget and wipe out your blunders, sorrows, and pains. 
Just keep looking forward to pleasures, successes, and holidays…)

After the New Year celebration party, the long holidays and seventeen sequels of ‘Captain Tankesh' on the TV were awaiting me ahead. 
In the parents’ room, as always, the Christmas Tree was touching the ceiling with the star on its top and among the shiny decorations there also hung chocolate candies ‘Battons’ and even ‘Bear Cub in the Forest’.
After the lead balloon carnival, life smiled again.

On the New Year's Eve Dad worked the night shift so that the lights did not fade on the Object’s Christmas trees.
And on the first morning of the New Year Mom left to her work so that water would uninterruptedly flow from the kitchen taps.

That morning I woke late when Dad had already been home from work.
He asked who visited the previous night and I answered that Mom’s new woman friend from the Zimins flat came briefly.

Then I read, went to the rink, played hockey in felt boots and came back to the sofa and books.
I was watching the concert of Maya Kristalinskaya on the TV—she as always wore a wide kerchief around her neck to hide the traces of the personal life drama—when Mom came from work.
I ran from the parents’ room to the hallway and Dad was already there from the kitchen.
He stood in front of my Mom who had not yet had time to take off her coat.

Then something strange happened, they stood still facing each other when Dad’s hand, as if by itself, disrupted the stillness to slap Mom’s cheeks
Mom said:
‘Kolya! What's that?' 
And she burst into tears which I had never seen by her. 
Dad began to yell and show a saucer with cigarette butts which he found behind the blind on the windowsill in the kitchen.
Mom said something about her woman-friend neighbor but Dad answered that the neighbor did not smoke Belomor-Canal cigarettes.
He flung his sheepskin overcoat on and before slamming the door after himself, shouted: 
‘You had been swearing to never even shit in one field with him!’

Mom went to the kitchen and then to her new woman-friend in the former the Zimins’ flat over the landing.
I put on my coat and felt boots and went to the rink again.
On the way, I met my brother and sister coming back home from there. 
I did not say anything to them about what happened.
At the rink, I was hanging around until full dark.

I did not want to play but neither want I to go home.
So I just aimlessly milled about or sat by the stove in the shed.
Then Natasha came up to me on the already empty ice field and said that Mom and my brother were waiting for me on the road and that at home Dad dumped the Christmas tree on the floor and kicked Sasha and that we were going now to spend the night at some acquaintances’.

Under the desolate light of lamps above the empty surrounding road, the four of us walked to the five-story building and Mom knocked on the door of the apartment on the first door. 
There lived the family of an officer with two children.
I knew the boy by the school, but not his sister who was from a too senior grade. 
Mom had brought the sandwiches with her but I did not feel like eating. 
She and my brother and sister went to sleep on the folding coach and I was bedded on the carpet next to the bookcase.
Through its glass doors, I saw the book ‘The Captain Dare-Devil' by Louis Bussenard and asked for permission to read it while the light from the kitchen was reaching the carpet. 

In the morning we left and crossed the courtyard of the Block to a distant corner building.
I knew that that was a hostel for officers but I had never entered there. 
In the long corridor on the second floor, Mom told us to wait because she needed to have a talk with the man whose name I absolutely don’t remember.
The three of us waited silently for a stretch of time after which Mom returned and led us home. 

She opened the locked door.
From the hallway through the open door to the parents’ room the Christmas tree was seen lying on its side by the balcony door.
Splinters of smashed decorations scattered the carpet around it. 
The wardrobe stood with its doors ajar and in front of it there was a soft mound of Mom’s clothes, each ripped from top to bottom...

Dad was away from home for a whole week.
Then Natasha said that he was coming the next day and so it happened.
And we started to live on...

When the holidays ended it turned out that before them I forgot in my schoolbag a newspaper package with an uneaten sandwich. 
The ham got soured and filled the schoolbag with the smell of rot.
Mom washed it from inside with the soap but the smell lingered and didn’t pass completely...

At school, they announced the contest between the pioneer grades at collecting waste paper. 
After classes, our class pioneers, in groups of threes or fours, visited the houses of the Block and the five-story buildings knocked on doors and asked if they had some waste paper. 
At times they gave us piles of old newspapers and magazines but I did not go the corner building with the hostel for officers.

And at the Detachment Library, they gave us a few piles of books. 
Some of them were worn and tattered but others not, like ‘The last of Mohicans’ by Fenimore Cooper with engraving pictures and only slightly damaged binding covers...

One evening, when we were playing hide-and-seek in the snow tunnels along the outer side of the skating rink, an older boy said that he could lift five people at a time. 
Easily, with just one hand.
I started to argue and told it's impossible and we made a bet.
He said that the five people should lie down in a compact group for more convenient grasping.
He and I, as opponents, and a few more boys went towards the Bugorok-Knoll beyond the light from the lamps above the rink and found an even spot.

I lay down on my back in the snow and stretched out my arms and legs, as he instructed, and four more boys lay on my extremities: one boy on each of them, all in all, five people. 
Only he didn’t try to lift us.
I felt alien fingers unbuttoning my pants and entering my underwear.
I couldn’t shake off the four boys who pinned me to the ground and only shouted something.
Then I suddenly felt free because they all ran away.

I buttoned my pants up and went home angry with myself that I could so easily be fooled.
One more visit to the topmast with a teapot.

(...and only quite recently it suddenly dawned on me that it was not a practical joke as with ‘showing Moscow’.
It was the check to verify suspicions caused by my fancy dress at the New Year party.
It’s ridiculous to say that almost a whole life passed until I guessed what’s what.
And this is the third, but, perhaps, the main of my Achilles’ heels – retarded thinking...)

On the way from school, my friend Yura Nikolayenko told me that my Mom was drawn in the caricature pinned to the stand by the House of Officers. 
In the picture, she tossed whether to go to her husband or to her lover. 
I made no answer but for more than a month, I did not go anywhere near the House of Officers. 

Then, of course, I had to go there because they showed ‘The Iron Mask’’ with Jean Marais in the role of D’Artagnan.
Before the show with my inside squeezed into a scared tangle I somehow approached the stand, but on the Whatman sheet, there already was a new caricature of a drunk driver in a green padded jacket and his wife with children weeping with blue tears. 

(...I felt alleviated then but for some reason, I still can vividly see the caricature of my Mom which I have never really seen. 
She’s got a sharp nose in it and long red fingernails while tossing – to one or to the other?
No, Yura Nikolayenko did not describe the picture for me, he only retold the inscription...) 

In the early spring, Dad came home very upset after a meeting at his work. 
There again began redundancy purge and, at the meeting, they said who else to cut off if not him?

So we started to pack things up for loading them into a big iron railway container as other redundant people before us.
However, the loading itself was done by Dad because the four of us left two weeks earlier. 

In the evening on the departure eve, I was sitting on a couch in Mom's new woman-friend's room across the landing. 
The woman and Mom went to the kitchen and I stayed back with a thick book which I took from the piles of waste paper at the Detachment Library and later presented to Mom’s woman-friend.
I idly turned the pages of that biography of some ante-revolution writer looking through the rare inset illustrations with photographic pictures of unknown people in strange clothes from another alien world. 
For some reason, I opened it somewhere in the middle and inscribed on the margin:
‘we are leaving.’
Then I remembered the principle of creating animated cartoons: if on several subsequent pages you spell some word—a letter per page—and then bend the pages and release them one by one making them quickly flip one after another, the letters will run in turn forming the written word.
 So I wrote letter-by-letter in the corners of subsequent pages:
‘I-S-e-h-r-g-u-e-y-O-g-o-l-t-s-o-f-f-a-m-l-e-a-v-i-n-g.’
But the cartoon did not work out, well.
Actually, it did not work at all but I did not care. 
I just slammed the book, left it on the couch and walked away. 

Early in the morning, a bus left the Block for the station of Valdai. 
Besides the four of us, there were a couple of families going on their vacations. 
When the bus turned to the road of concrete slabs descending from the Block, Mom suddenly asked me who we would better live with: my Dad, or the man whose name I absolutely do not remember.
‘Mom! We do not need anyone! I will work, I’ll be helping you,’ said I.
She did not answer.
And those were not just words, I believed in what I was saying, but Mom knew the labor laws better than me.

When the descent was over, at the turn to the Pumping Station and the Checkpoint, the bus stopped.
The man about who Mom asked me, came in.
He approached her, took her hand telling something.
I turned away and looked out of the window.
He went out, the bus slammed the door and drove on.
We pulled up at the white gate of the Checkpoint.
The sentries checked us and the vacationers and kept the gate open letting the bus out of the Zone.

A soldier grasping with his hand a tube in the white-paint-coated gate grate floated by behind the glass of the bus window. 
I was fully realizing it was the last time I saw the stranger soldier and the familiar gate, and that I would not ever return there.
It only that I did not know yet that in that way I was leaving my childhood...

