
And if the parents’ bed was brought from their room to ours that meant that in the evening there would be brought tables from the neighbors to their room and the guests would gather there.
The children of the neighbors would come to our room to play.
When it got late and the neighbors’ children all gone to their apartments I would venture to the parents’ room.
The room would be filled with noise and thin fog of tobacco smoke.
Everybody would try to speak louder than everybody else.
Old Morozov would announce that being a young man he once oared for seventeen kilometers to a date and someone would answer that he had to have known it was worth it and everyone would laugh out loud and start dancing to a disk on the gramophone brought by one of the guests.
Then they again would speak without listening to each other and Mom sitting at the table would begin to sing about the lights in the streets of the Saratov-City and her eyelids would fall halfway onto her eyes.
At that sight, I, mortified by the shame, would get on her knees and say, 
‘Mom, don’t sing, please, don’t!’
And she would laugh and say she did not drink anymore and would push the glass back but go on singing.

Then the guests would go to their apartments taking out the tables and still talking without listening.
I would be sent to our room where Sasha would be already sleeping but Natasha would not.
From the kitchen would come the tinkle of the dishes washed up by Grandma and Mom and then in our room the light would be turned on shortly for the parents' bed to be taken out… 

My Mom was also taking part in the Artistic Amateur Activities at the House of the Officers.
I knew that it was very far because a couple of times the parents took me there to the cinema to a great envy of Sasha and Natasha.
Before the movies, they always showed a short newsreel "The News of the Day" and one of them really frightened me with bulldozers in a fascist concentration camp that filled long trenches with corpses of naked people pushing them there with their blades. 
Mom told me to shut my eyes and not watch and after that, they didn't take me to the cinema anymore. 

But when at the House of the Officers there was a concert by  Artistic Amateur Activities Dad took me with him.
They sang from the scene with the accompaniment of the button accordion and the audience clapped.
One man talked for a long time and there again was clapping.
But I waited impatiently for the moment to see my Mom on the scene.
At last, when a lot of women in the same long skirts came to dance with a lot of men in high boots, Dad said, ‘Aha! Here is your dear Mommy!’
But I could not make her out – the women in the long skirts looked all so alike.
Dad had to point again and after that, I looked only at her so as not to lose. 
If not for such intent attention, maybe I would have missed the moment that for many years got stuck in me like a splinter that you can't pull out and it's better to avoid pressing the place where it sits.

The women dancers on the scene were spinning quicker and quicker, their long skirts were also turning and rising up to their knees, but the skirt on my Mom suddenly splashed higher and for a moment there flashed her legs seen to the very panties.
I felt unbearable shame.
For the rest of the concert, I kept looking only at the floor between the rows of chairs and on our way home I did not talk to anyone and did not answer why I was so pouted. 

(...in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet…)

And, really, what the point in those concerts at all if there was a brown shiny box of radio on the wall in our—children's—room?
When they broadcast Arkady Raikin you should turn the white knob of the volume control to make it louder and run and call everyone in the house to gather in our room to laugh all together under the box on the wall.
And you could hush the radio or even turn it off when there was a concert for the cello and the orchestra or if someone was telling what a good news was the news about the victory of revolution in Cuba which made him so happy that he turned out two daily tasks during one shift just for spite of the revenge-seekers and their leader Adenauer.

But May Day celebrating was not a home holiday at all.

First, you had to walk a long way by the road descending away past the Block’s corner building and then, down there, go on walking, on and on.
And there were so many people going the same way, both adults and children.
People greeted each other cheerfully and in their hands, they had balloons and thin twigs with leaves of green tissue paper attached to them with black threads, or red cloth with white letters between a pair of poles; and also portraits of different men, both bold and not too much so, on stubby sticks. 

Like almost all the children, I also had a small red flag in my hands, on a thin—like a pencil, only a bit longer—stick.
The yellow grated circle in the center of the flag depicted the globe with a yellow dove in flight above it and even higher a string of yellow letters reading: ‘Peace to the World!’
Of course, I couldn’t read at that time but those flags remained unchangeable for years upon years.

As we walked on, ahead of us there emerged music.
It sounded louder and louder and then we passed by the line of musicians with shining trumpets and past a red tall balcony with people on it in their peaked caps, but the balcony, for some reason, had no house to it… 

After one of the May Days, I felt like drawing a holiday. 
Grandma gave me a sheet of ruled paper and a pencil.
In the center of the sheet, I drew a large balloon on a string going down to the edge of the paper. 
It looked good – so festive.
But I wanted more than that, I wanted to have a holiday for all over the world.
So, to the right from the balloon, I drew a blind fence behind which there were not ours but Germans and other enemies from the newsreels in the House of the Officers, and all of them, of course, invisible because of the fence.
Well, Germans, let’s even you have a holiday!
And I drew another balloon on the string coming from behind the fence.
Lastly, to make it clear who is who and who is where I drew a cross on the enemy's balloon. 
For a minute I admired my art and then ran to share it, for a starter, with Grandma.

She couldn’t at first figure out what is what and I had to explain her the picture.
But when I got to the point that let even Germans have a holiday, we are not meanies, eh? – she stopped me at once to scold severely.
Did I not know, said she, that because of my those balloons with crosses the ‘black raven' vehicle would come and take my Dad away arrested, said she, and asked if that was what I wanted. 
I felt sorry for Dad and terrified by the prospect to be left without him.
I burst into tears and crushed the ill-fated drawing and then ran to the bathroom and thrust it behind the pig-iron door of the water boiler Titan where they lighted fire when heating water for the bathing...

The hardest thing in the morning was getting out of the bed.
You seemed to be ready to give anything if only they would allow to lie for another one minute or two and stop shouting it was time to go to the kindergarten.

And one morning the pillow was so yielding under my head and the mattress, spread over the folding bed, had become an exact mold of my body to such an extent that to tear myself away from them and from the heat accumulated overnight under the blanket was something unthinkable and unbearable.
I went on lying until there came a frightening irrefutable thought – if I would not tear me off that boggy drowsy bliss right now then I would never come to the kindergarten that morning and never come to anywhere at all because it would be death in sleep.
I climbed out into the cold room and began to dress…

On Sundays, it was possible to lie as long as you wanted but never again did the bed take such a pleasing shape. 

One Sunday I woke up alone in the room and heard Sasha-and-Natasha’s merry screams from somewhere outside.
I donned and hurried out into the corridor.  
No, not in the kitchen, where only Grandma was clinking the pots’ lids.
Aha! In the parents’ room!
I ran in there at the height of the fun – my brother and sister and Mom were laughing together at a white shapeless lump standing in the corner on their bare feet.
Of course, it’s Dad!
He had covered himself with the thick blanket from the parents’ bed and now awkwardly loomed there next to the cupboard.
But suddenly those legs started to jump together fluttering the white folds of that horrible bare-legged lump.
It cut Mom and the three of us clinging to her dressing gown off from the door to the corridor.
Oh, how we laughed! And clung to Mom more and more convulsively.
Then one of us passed over to crying and Mom said, ‘There-there, this is Dad, silly!’
But Sasha did not stop (or maybe Natasha but not me though my laughter was more and more transforming into hysterics) and Mom said. ‘Well, enough, Kolya!’
And the blanket straightened up revealing laughing Dad in his underpants and tank shirt and we all together began to console Sasha sitting high in Mom’s arms and incredulously trying to laugh through tears.

(..laughter and fear go hand in hand and there is nothing more frightening than the incomprehensible…)

And the next morning I went to the parents' room to admit that at night I again peed in the bed. 
They were already dressed and Dad said, ‘Gak! And that's a big boy!’
And Mom ordered me to peel off my underpants and get into their bed. 
She took from a shelf in the wardrobe dry underpants for me and went into the kitchen after Dad.

I lay under the blanket still warm with their warmth.
Even the sheet was so soft and gentle.
Full of pleasure I stretched out as much as I could – both legs and arms.
My right hand went under the pillow and pulled out an incomprehensible hardened rag.
I could not determine its purpose in the bed but I felt that I touched something shameful and shouldn't ask anyone about it…

It's hard to say what was more delicious – Mom's cookies or Grandma's buns both baked for holidays in the blue electric oven ‘Kharkov’.

Grandma Martha spent her days in the kitchen cooking and washing up and in the children's room looking after us.
She read us the book called ‘Russian Epic Tales' about hero warriors who fought the myriad hordes and the Dragon Gorynich and from time to time visited Prince Vladimir the Red Sun in the city of Kiev.

The three of us sat on Grandma's iron bed around her and listened to the exploits of Alesha Popovich and Dobrinya Nikitich.
When the heroes had their moments of sadness they remembered their mothers, each one his own, but they all addressed their different faraway mothers with the same reproach: that they'd better wrap them into a piece of white cloth while they still have been silly babies and throw them into the fast running River-Mommy.
Only Ilya of Murom and Warrior Svyatogor, who grew so mighty that even Mother the Earth could bear him no more and only mountain rocks still somehow withstood his movements, never raised that lamentation.

At times one or another of the hero warriors had a fight with one or another beauty disguised in armor. 
The outcome of such fights was different but the defeated would invariably say, ‘Do not kill me but treat with good food and drink and kiss on my mouth as sweet as sugar'.
Those epic places in the tales heard more than once I knew by heart and anticipated them in advance.

Grandma Martha called the bathroom ‘a bathhouse' and after a weekly bath, she was returning to our room steam-heated to red and half undressed in only one of her long skirts and in a man's tank shirt. 
She sat down on her iron bed to cool off while combing and braiding her gray hair into a pigtail.
On her left forearm, she had a large mole in the form of a female nipple, the so-called ‘bitch's udder'. 

After one of her after-bath proceedings when she seemed to notice nothing but the damp strands of her hair and the curved plastic comb and my brother-and-sister were playing on the sofa I sneaked under the iron net of the narrow Grandma’s bed sagging under her weight.
I turned over to my back and looked up – under her skirt between her straddled legs put wide and firmly on the floor.
Why? I did not know.
And I couldn’t make out anything in the dusk under the dark skirt.
I crawled away but for a long time later I had a feeling of guilt and a strong suspicion that she was aware of my maneuvers. 

Sasha was a reliable younger brother – taciturn and credulous.
He was born after the brisk Natasha, blueish because of the umbilical cord almost strangled him, but in a shirt.
The shirt was taken off from him in the maternity hospital, Mom said that they made some special medicine from newborns' shirts.

And Natasha turned out a real shrewd weasel.
She was the first to know all the news – that next day Grandma would bake buns, that new tenants would enter the flat on the first floor, and that on Saturday the parents would go someplace and that if you killed a frog it would bring a heavy rain about.

She had two pigtails starting at the sides of the back of her head.
The braids reaching her shoulders were intertwined with ribbons to tie a bow-knot.
Those bows never held in place crumbling into a knot and a pair of ribbon tails.
Probably from zealous turning her head on all the quarters to find out: what-where-when?

The two-year age difference gave me a tangible degree of authority in the eyes of the younger.
However, when Sasha taciturnly repeated my ascent to the attic, it seemed like by that feat he overtook me for two years.
Of course, neither he, nor I, nor Natasha was at that time able to make such formulations and conclusions.
We stayed at the level of emotional sensations and interjections like:
‘Oooh, boy!..’
or:
‘Oh-oh, boy!..’

Probably, the desire to reinforce me faltered authority and self-esteem, or maybe some other reasons—already forgotten—resulted in my getting nasty.
One evening, when the light in the room was already turned off but my brother-and-sister laid to sleep under one blanket with their heads on the opposite armrests of the leatherette sofa were still giggling and kicking each other, and Grandma Martha was standing over her bed whispering something into the corner under the ceiling, I suddenly spoke up from my folding bed:
‘Know what, Grandma? God is a jerk!’
She started to threaten me with the licking of a red-hot frying pan that was awaiting me in the future but I only laughed insolently and, encouraged by the reverent silence from the sofa with the little ones, kept repeating: 
‘Whatever! Your God is a jerk!’

The next morning Grandma Martha did not talk to me.
At the end of the day, I returned from the kindergarten and Natasha shared information that when Dad came home in the morning after the night shift Grandma told him everything and cried in the kitchen. 
And that at the moment the parents were gone to a party at someone's but I will get it and that’s for sure!
To my toadying attempts to start a dialogue, Grandma Martha gave no answer at all and soon went over to the kitchen. 

The front door slammed, the parents’ voices sounded in the hallway.
They moved to the kitchen and the talk invigorated.
Through the door of our room, it was not possible to make out what's going on. 
The voices sounded louder and louder until the door flew open with Dad’s hand.
‘What? Scoffing at elders? I’ll show you a ‘jerk’!’
His hands pulled the narrow black belt with a flashing rectangle of the buckle from his pants waist.

His arm swayed and never known pain scorched me.
Yet more. Yet more.
Wailing and wriggling I rolled under the Grandma’s bed to escape the belt.
Dad grasped the back of the bed and with one mighty jerk pulled it to the middle of the room.
The mattress with everything fell down under the wall.
I followed the bed to shelter under its shield of springy mesh. 
Dad pulled the bed back and forth whipping it on both sides, but I with inexplicable speed ran on all fours under the mesh jumping overhead and mingled my howling and wailing, ‘Daddy! Dear my! Don’t beat me! I won’t! Never again!’, into his, ‘Snotty sod!’
Mom and Grandma came running from the kitchen,
Mom screamed, ‘Kolya! Don’t!’ and stretched out her hand to catch the hissing impact of the belt.
Grandma too kvetched loudly and they took Dad out of the room.

Crestfallen, sobbing, I rubbed the sores looking away from the younger who silent and petrified huddled in the back of the sofa.

In the courtyard, we played ‘classlets'. 
First, you need a chalk to draw a big rectangular on the concrete path and divide it into four pairs of squares.
Then you must have ‘bitka' – a round flat shoe cream container filled with sand for stability. 
You throw bitka into one of the classlets and jump to it through others on one leg, pick the bitka up and jump on to the last classlet and out.
If your foot hasn’t touched any line on the way you may throw bitka into the next classlet and repeat the jumping tour.
After your bitka visited all of the classlets (from the first to the eighth) you mark one of them as your ‘home’ and further in the game you can behave in that classlet as at home – get on both feet and relax.
If your bitka remains on a line or if you step on a line with the jump then another player enters the game and you become a spectator.

There also were games with the ball.
For example, you should strike the ball against the ground with one hand pronouncing one word at each beat:
‘I! – know! – five! – girl! – names!’
At each of subsequent strikes at the ball, you had to name five random girl names yet without any doubling. 
Then were announced and pronounced five boy names,  five flowers, five animals, etc., etc., until the ball bounced out of reach or the player went astray in their enumerations.

Another ball game was not as much intellectual.
You just strike the ball against the faded pinkish plaster of the building (preferably closer to the corner and not to the window on the first floor).
Guessing the landing place of the re-bounced ball, you jump over it with your legs wide apart before it strikes the ground.
The player behind you should catch the ball after it had hit the ground and throw it back against the wall – this time for his jump and your catching.

There may be more players in the game though but then you have to wait for your turn in the line of the jumpers. 
I was enchanted by the infinity of the game.
It was like those endless pictures on the side of the Fire Extinguisher…

We also played outside the courtyard across the desolate road surrounding the two blocks.
Atop of the descend towards the Recruit Depot Barracks, there was a high fence with a wooden gate enclosing the garbage containers for all the Block. 
And next to the fence there stretched a level area covered with green grass except for a solitary pile of sand in it.

The sand game had no name.
You just scooped a handful of sand and threw it up and then caught it back into the palm.
Holding the catch, you had to pronounce:
‘So much  – for Lenin!’
Then the sand in the palm was thrown up and caught back for the second time.
Over the second catch the words to pronounce were:
‘So much – for Stalin!’
After the third throwing up no one cared to catch the sand, on the contrary, they hid their hands behind their backs and then even clapped the hands to shake anything clear off:
‘And so much – for Hitler! That’s it!’

It seemed to me not very fair – to leave for the last in the trinity not the tiniest speck of sand.
One day playing at the pile alone I broke the rules and caught a pinch of sand even for Hitler although I knew he was a very bad one… 

Besides, we made ‘secrets’ - scooping out small holes, no deeper than a teacup, and laying their bottoms with the heads of the flowers collected in the grass.
A shard of glass was put upon the petals of the heads.
The flowers looked even more beautiful through the glass that pinned them down.
Then the hole was earthed back again.
We made arrangements ‘to check our secret’ the following day but either forgot about it or it rained and then we could not find ‘the secret’ and made another.

One day the rain caught me in one of the round gazebos in the courtyard.
No, not the rain, it was a thunderstorm.
Black clouds piled up over the whole courtyard and at once it grew dark as if by night.
The adults and children who were in the gazebo ran along the paths to their houses.
Only I tarried over a forgotten book with pictures of three hunters as they wander through the mountain forests.
And then a waterfall rushed down out of the darkness above.
It was unthinkable to run home under it, I had to wait until it was over.

Thunder pearls erupted madly, the lightning cut the sky from the edge to the edge of the Block.
The gazebo bounced from deafening rumblings and water under the pressure of wind whipped almost to the center of the floor circle.
I laid the book on the bench along the leeward side but some crazy drops reached even there.
It was scary and wet and cold.

When the storm let up the clouds of darkness broke asunder and revealed the blue of the sky, it turned out that the day was far from over yet and my sister Natasha was running from our entranceway with an already unnecessary umbrella – Mom had sent her to call me home. 
‘We knew that you were here', she said panting, ‘You could be seen at the beginning...' 

(...not that I have some special flair for conspiracies but every time a confluence of circumstances leads me to where there is some secret collusion...)

When in the kindergarten three boys of the senior group began to exchange clandestine hints, something like:
‘So today, yes?’
‘We’ll definitely go, yes?’
‘After the kindergarten, yes?’
I felt unbearable bitterness that there had been planned some adventure for that day and it would pass by but I stay with the same as always every day.
I approached the leader of the three and asked directly:
‘Where are you going to?’
‘To steal tomatoes in the Where-Where Mountains.’
‘May I go too?’
‘Okay.’

I had already had a vague idea that stealing was bad but I had never seen mountains in all my life only the low hillock Bugorok near our Block overgrown with fir trees and facing with its sandy drop-off side the grassy football field in the level area by the enclosure with the garbage bins.
But first of all, I desired the wonderful tomatoes from the Where-Where Mountains. 
And I almost saw their red shiny sides.
So I could hardly wait for the hour when the adults come to take the children from the kindergarten to refuse to go home with someone else’s mother.  
No, thank you, with the boys I’d reach the Block sooner.

Four of us went out of the gate but we didn't take the short trail through the forest. 
Instead, we turned left to the wide dirt road on which there never was seen any vehicle. 
The road went uphill, then the descent began and I kept looking out around and asking the same question –  when would the Where-Where Mountains stand out? 
However, with the answers getting more and more curt and reluctant, I held back the question in fear of destroying my participation in the tomato adventure.

We went out to the road of concrete slabs whose junctions were filled with the black pitch.
I knew that road, it descended from the Gorka blocks to the House of Officers.
We did not follow the road but crossed it into the thicket of supple bushes and went along the path that led to a house of gray logs with a sign for those who could read.

The boys did not go any further. 
They started aimlessly wander between the bushes and the ashen gray log walls of the house until a man came out of the door and angrily drove us away.
Our leader told him that he had been sent by his parents to pick up the newspapers and mail but the man grew even more enraged and I went home well taught what going to the Where-Where Mountains meant.

But I still believed that adventures and travels would come my way and it’s the must to be ready for them.
That’s why, when a box of matches came up in the kitchen, I grabbed it without hesitation – you have to get trained, right?
A couple of initial attempts proved that lighting a match at its box side was so easy. 
And immediately there cropped up the desire to proudly demonstrate to someone my new skills.
Who to?
To Sasha and Natasha, sure thing, they would admire more than Grandma.
My authority by them required restoration after recent flops.

(...however, this list of motives is made by me in hindsight, from an unimaginably distant future—my current present over this here fire loaded with potatoes baking in it. 
But in that unimaginably distant past, I without any philosophizing and logical justifications perfectly knew that…) 

I should call the younger to some inconspicuous place and show them my command of the fire.
The most secluded place, of course, was in the parents’ room under their bed and we crawled there together.

At the sight of matches in my hands Natasha oh-ohed in a whisper. 
Sasha kept silence and closely watched the process.
The first match caught fire but went out too soon. 
The second developed a good flame and all of a sudden moved closer to the mesh tulle bed cover hanging down by the wall.
The narrow tip of the fire bent forward, the upturned icicle of yellow flame burst through the tulle, forming a black, ever-widening gap.
For some time I looked at what was happening before I guessed the meaning and shouted to my brother and sister:
'Fire! Run away! Fire!'
But those little fools stayed where they were and only boohooed in duet.
I got out from under the bed and ran across the landing to the Zimins’ where my Mom and Grandma were sitting in the kitchen of Polinna Zimin drinking tea with her.

On my skimble-skamble announcement of fire alarm, the three women rushed over the landing. 
I was the last to come to our apartment.
Under the ceiling of the hallway there lazily revolved wisps of yellowish smoke.
The bedroom door stood open and half-meter high flames of fire danced on the parents’ bed.

In the room there hung a thin blue mist and somewhere in it, the twins were howling. 
Grandma pulled the mattress and all down to the floor and stamped the fire with her slippers calling her God.
Mom yelled to Sasha and Natasha to get out from under the bed.
The fire jumped over onto the tulle curtain of the balcony door and Grandma pulled it down with her bare hands.
In the kitchen, Polinna Zimin rattled the saucepans in the sink filling them with water from the tap. 
Mom took the twins to the children’s room came back running and told me to go over there too.

We sat on the sofa silent, heeding the to-and-fro racing in the corridor, uninterrupted swish of water from the tap in the kitchen, the stray exclamations of the women. 
What now?
Then the noise little by little abated, the hallway door clicked behind departing Polinna Zimin. 
From the parents’ bedroom there came the sound of mop taps as during washing the floor; from the toilet room the sound of water poured down into the bowl.
And then the silence reigned – complete suspended silence.

The door opened. 
Mom stood there with a wide seaman’s belt in her hand.
‘Come here!’ she called without giving a name, but the three of us perfectly knew who had been called.
I stood up and went to get it.

We met in the middle of the room, under the silk shade from the ceiling. 
‘Don’t you ever dare, you piece of a scoundrel!’, she said and swayed the belt.
I cringed.
The slap fell on the shoulder. 
It was a slap, not a blow – no pain at all.
Mom turned and left.
I was astounded by the ease of punishment.
It's nothing compared to what I would get when Dad came home from work and saw the bandaged hands of Grandma after she had applied vegetable oil to them. 

When the door clicked in the hallway and Dad's voice said, 'What the… er... What happened here?', Mom quickly went there from the kitchen. 
All that she said was not heard but I clearly made out these words: 
‘I’ve already punished him, Kolya.’
Dad went into the parents’ bedroom to estimate the damage and a little later came to our room.
‘Ew, you!’ was all he told me.

The apartment smelled with smoke for a few days.
The runner from the parents' bedroom was cut up into smaller pieces of carpet.
The remnants of tulle and the burned bed were taken away to the garbage enclosure across the road.

A few years later, when I already knew how to read and was coming across matchboxes with the warning on their stickers, ‘Hide matches from children!’ I knew that that was about me too.
