

Children of all nations and different age are much alike, take, for instance, their love of hide-and-seek…

That game we played not only in the courtyard but at home as well—we were three!—and sometimes with the participation of neighbor children from the same landing – the Zimins and the Savkins 
The apartment, of course, did not provide as good hiding places.
Well, under the parents’ bed, or then... behind the cupboard corner… er… O, yes! – the cloth wardrobe in the hallway.
My Dad made it himself.

A vertical two-meter high bar planted near the hallway corner, with two metal rods connecting its top to the walls, cut out a sizable parallelepiped of space.
It remained only to hung a cloth curtain on ringlets running along the horizontal rods and cover the whole contraption with a piece of plywood so that the dust did not collect inside.
Ready!
On the paint-coated wall inside the cloth wardrobe, there was fixed a wide board with pegs for hanging coats and other things.
The brown wicker chest stood under the hanger and there still remained a lot of room for the footwear.

Actually, there were not too many places for hiding but playing the game was interesting all the same.
You hide yourself in one of the mentioned places and, taming your breath, listen to cautious steps of the ‘it’ and then off you rush to be first at the sofa in the children’s room from where the 'it' had started their search, and attest your win by tap-tapping on the sofa and the loud shout, ‘Knock-knock! It’s for me!’, so as not to be the ‘it’ in the following game of Hide-and-seek.

But one day Sasha hid so that I couldn't find him. 
He just disappeared.
I even checked the bathroom and the hallway closet, although we had a standing deal to never hide there.
I felt through each of the coats on the hanger behind the cloth curtain in the hallway.
I opened the wardrobe in the parents' room with Mom's dresses and Dad's jackets hanging in the dark compartment behind the left door with the mirror. 
Just in case, I even checked behind the right door where there was no room for hiding because of the drawers with stacks of sheets and pillowcases and in the bottom one I once found the blue square of the seaman’s collar cut off a sailor’s shirt.
And under it there was a dagger of a naval officer with its yellow ribbed hilt and the long steel body, tapering to the needle-sharp point hidden in the black taut scabbard. 
Later, I tried to share the great secret with the younger ones, but Natasha casually replied that she knew about the dagger long ago and even had shown it to Sasha.

And now Natasha, giggling, followed my vain search and when I frantically cried out to my brother that, Okay, I agreed to be the ‘it’ one more game let him only go out from where he was now, Natasha yelled to him to sit tight and quiet and not give up.
I had run out of my patience and refused to play at all, but she suggested me to go out into the corridor for a couple of minutes.

On coming back I saw Sasha standing in the middle of the room pleased and silent and blinking bemusedly while Natasha told how he climbed the fourth drawer in the wardrobe and she piled the socks over him…

Sometimes there were exclusively family games at home with no neighbors taking part.

Hearing a lively laughing from the parents’ room I put the book aside on the sofa and hurried over there.
‘What are you doing here?’ asked I among the general mirth.
‘We check the pots!’
‘What’s that?’
‘Come and have a check!’
For the check, I had to sit on Dad’s back and grab him by the neck while he was firmly holding my legs.
I liked it but then he turned my back towards Mom and I felt her finger rooting my ass as deep as the pants let go.
‘The pot is leaky!’ announced Mom.
Everybody laughed and me too, although I felt somehow ashamed…

Another time Dad asked me,’Wanna see Moscow?’
‘Wow! Sure!’
He came from behind and put his hands tight on my ears, then squeezing my head in his hands he lifted me meter high from the floor.
‘How now? D'you, see Moscow?' 
‘Yes! Yes!’ screamed I.
He dropped me on the floor and I did my best not to show the tears from the smarting pain in the ears flattened against the skull. 
‘Aha! Got fooled! It’s so easy to fool you!’

(...much later I figured out that he was repeating the practical jokes played on him in his childhood…)

In the course of the Hide-and-seek with disappearing Sasha, when probing the clothes in the cloth wardrobe in the hallway, I noticed a lonely bottle of lemonade in the narrow cleft between the wall and the wicker chest.
I just adored the lemonade then,  the only reproachable quality of it was that the carbonated nectar kept disappearing from the glass so too fast. 
The bottle I found was obviously stored for some holiday and then forgotten about. 

I did not care to remind of it to anyone and the following day, or maybe the day after the following day, taking the opportunity of being home alone, I pulled the lemonade from behind the chest and hurried to the kitchen. 
Still, in the corridor my impatient hand discovered the slack of the metal lid on the bottle, I tore it off and flung the bottle up to my thirsty lips. 
By the middle of the second gulp, I realized that it was not that the lemonade was not somewhat not quit it but not it at all. 
Turning the bottle back in the normal position I saw that after the holiday it was filled with sunflower oil for storage.

That's good  that no one saw my try at drinking sunflower oil except for the small white box on the wall with red cross on its door, the hoard of first-aid kits, unknown pills and dark glass phials, between the cloth wardrobe and the hallway closet and also the black electric meter just above the entrance door. 
But they will not tell anyone…

The next gastronomical offense was filching of a newly baked bun which Mom took out from the electric oven “Kharkov” together with a bunch of others to spread them on a towel over the kitchen table.
Their brownish shining round backs were so tempting that I violated Mom’s order to wait a bit till the general tea party, and yanked one off into the lair on the wicker chest behind the cloth curtain.
Perhaps that bun was too hot indeed, or else the sense of guilt overwhelmed the taste sensations, but, hastily swallowing the forbidden fruit of the culinary art, I didn't feel the usual pleasure and only wanted the bun to be finished sooner. 
When from the kitchen sounded Mom’s call to all to came over for the tea with buns I did not want it, not in the least…

Well, in general, I was quite a law-abiding child; a not very dexterous slow-goer, yet diligent in earnest and if something went wrong it was not on purpose but simply so it turned out that way. 
Dad grumbled that my Sloth-Mommy was born a moment before me and all I was good for was lying on the sofa with a book day after day.
And Mom protested that reading was beneficial and I might become a doctor and look very elegant in a white robe.
I did not want to become a doctor, I never liked the smell in doctors' offices… 

At one of the lessons, Seraphima Sergeevna showed us a plywood frame 10 cm x 10 cm, a prototype of a loom with two rows of small nails on two opposite sides. 
A thick colored thread stretched back and forth from one nail to another on the opposite side,  formed the warp.
Multicolored threads of wool were interwoven through the warp turned a miniature motley rug. 
The teacher told us to bring such frames for the next lesson, our parents would certainly help us to make them.
However, Dad was not home, he worked the second shift that week and Mom was busy in the kitchen.
Yet she helped find a piece of plywood from an old parcel-box and allowed to take the saw from the hallway closet.

I worked in the bathroom pinning the plywood with my foot to the stool.
The saw got stuck too often, tore out small chips and scraps from the plywood but after a long tedious labor a crooked, zigzag sided square was sawed off.
And then I ran into the major problem – how to cut out a smaller square inside the ready one to make a frame of it?
I tried to hack the middle out with a kitchen knife and a hammer but only split the piece cut off with so many a hem! and an effort. 
By the time when I had to go to bed, the found plywood was spoiled in fruitless attempts and I realized that I was not fit to be a master.
The disappointment was so great that I raised a howl before Mom.

Lying in the folding bed I wanted to stay awake till my Dad was home after work.
I kept drowsing and waking and at some point heard Dad’s voice in the kitchen replying to my Mom angrily:
‘What? Again “Kolya”? What “Kolya”?’
And I fell asleep.

In the morning Mom said at breakfast: 
‘Look what Dad made for you to take to school.’
I got overwhelmed with happiness and delight, seeing the frame of a loom polished with sandpaper. 
Not a split, not a chip, not a crack anyplace.
And two rows of small nails in the lines straighter than a ruler...

The next year Dad brought from his work a jigsaw for me.
At school, I enrolled the group "The Skillful Hands". 
It did not go well with my jigsawing – the thin blades broke too often. 
Although I managed to make a frame of plywood (with Dad's help and polishing) for my Mom's photo. 

Doing pyrography was much easier and I liked the smell of charring wood.
Dad brought home a scorcher that he had constructed at his work and I produced a couple of illustrations to Krylov’s fables from The Book for Future Craftsmen.

All that does not mean that I spent my childhood in the realm of hand-made playthings.
I had a big Modeling Designer Kit bought from the store.
It was a cardboard box filled with sets of tin strips and panels with rows of round holes in them for threading small bolts and nuts to assemble details for construction of different things – a car, a locomotive, a windmill, a you-call-it.
It took about two months to accomplish a tower crane, taller than a stool it was, consuming all the pile of bolts and nuts in the kit.
I would finish it sooner but for Sasha’s insistent tries to take part in the construction too.

And the Robot costume for the New Year matinee about the Christmas Tree in the school gym was also made by my Dad.
Mom found the design of it in The Working Woman magazine which also each month was put into the mailbox on our entrance door.

The finished costume represented a box of a thin but sturdy one-layer cardboard.
The box was put on the shoulders and reached down to the crotch.
It was Robot's body ornamented on the chest with “+” on the left side and “-” on the right, just like on the large flat batteries for a pocket flashlight.
Inside the box, there also was a battery but more powerful, the Czech "Crown", and a small switch. 
Clicking it turned on and off the light-bulb nose in the cuboid-shaped Robot's head which was put upon mine like a helmet.
The square slits for the eyes on each side of the nose-bulb in the Robot's face allowed to see how and who with you were walking about the Christmas Tree…

At the Detachment Library, I asked (with fear and a timid hope) for the permission and was allowed (what a joy!) to choose my reading not just from the books recently returned and stacked on the librarian's desk but also from those on the shelves. 

To the right from librarian's desk there stood a wall of the Complete Collection of Works by V.I.Lenin in dense rows of volumes different only by the hue of blue in their covers, depending on the year of edition.
The opposite wall was paneled with multi-volumed rows of works by Marx and Engels in brown bindings and the wall by the door was hidden behind the tall ranks of Stalin's writings. 

Rows of thick, never opened books with the golden embossing of the letters and numbers on their spines, bearing convex relief portraits of the writers on their lid-like heavy front covers. 

But there was a cleft in the blue wall – the passage to that part of the Detachment Library, where, forming narrow passages, stood shelves with the books of varying degree of wear. 
The books by Russian writers were arranged in alphabetical order: Aseev, Belyaev, Bubentsoff…; others were ordered by the country names: American literature, Belgian literature...; or by the sections they belonged to – Economics, Geography, Politics…
There also were multi-volume collections: Jack London, Fenimore Cooper, Walter Scott (for all my efforts I never found among his works a novel about Robin Hood, but only about Rob Roy).

I loved wandering in the condensed silence of that maze of passages between the shelves, taking books off them, now and then, from as far above as allowed my height, to read the titles and put them back.
In the end, pressing the chosen couple to my chest, I returned to the librarian desk. 
Sometimes she put one of the books brought by me aside, saying it was too early for me to read. 

Once when I meandered the treasured labyrinth there happened an embarrassing thing – I farted.
The sound was not too loud yet, in case it had been heard at the librarian desk behind the wall of Marxism-Leninism classics, I tried to disguise my fault by imitations of wind-breaking produced with lips while still walking the narrow passages between the shelves.
Like, say, a thoughtless fancy of a boy for whom it was too early yet to read some books.
However, one of the camouflage farts turned out so successful, natural and rolling that I got really frustrated – the first, unintentional one she might haven't heard but the last was really unmissable.

(… as your mother’s mother would put it:
‘Kept fixing until mucked up.’
She liked to use Ukrainian proverbs in her speech…)

At the end of the winter holidays to the other subscriptions in the mailbox on our door was added The Pioneer Pravda. 
Sure enough, I was still an Octoberist but at school, they told us that we already had to subscribe to that newspaper and in any other way prepare ourselves to become pioneers in the future. 

Mom passed The Pioneer Pravda to me with the words: 
‘Wow! You've started already receiving newspapers!' 
I felt pleased to be admitted to the world of adults, at least at that point. 

And I was reading the newspaper all day long.
Every line printed in its four pages.

When my parents returned from work in the evening, I met them in the hallway to proudly report that I had read everything, everything, everything!.. 
They said, ‘Good job!’, then hung their coats behind the cloth curtain in the corner, and went over to the kitchen.
There's something unpleasant when for your pains you’re paid with a fond indifference.

Any hero having fought a life-and-death battle with Gorynich the Dragon to free a beautiful captive and getting from her afterward not the regular kiss of the sugar-sweet mouth but a fleeting ‘Good job!' would think twice before another combat whether the scrap was worth the while. 
It was the last time that I read The Pioneer Pravda entirely – from its red title with the statement of the printed organ affiliation down to (and including too) the editorial office telephone numbers and address in Moscow. 

The omission of the desired and deserved reward called for compensating justice restoration.
So, the following morning it was not difficult for me to persuade myself to wink at Mom's instructions that three spoonfuls of sugar were absolutely enough for one cup of tea. 
I was alone in the kitchen and while adding sugar to my tea I got distracted with considering the frost patterns in the kitchen window pane which was the reason why the count of the added spoonfuls started not from the first one. 
By an additional mistake, I measured sugar with a tablespoon instead of a teaspoon. 
The resulting cloy treacle was good only for pouring it into the sink.
And that became another lesson to me – filched pleasures are not as sweet as might have been expected.

The fact of having read The Pioneer Pravda issue so exhaustively inflated my self-confidence and at the next visit to the Detachment Library, I took from the French literature shelves a weighty volume with a bouquet of swords on the cover, The Three Musketeers by Dumas-peré. 
The librarian after a moment's hesitation wrote the book into my reader-form and I proudly took home the bulky booty.

I didn’t even think to read it on the sofa but took it to the kitchen and opened on the oilcloth-covered table.
The very first page full of notes who was who in the XVII century France looked like a rather complicated reading stuff. 
But then it started moving and by the scene of D'Artangan  parting with his parents, I figured out for myself the meaning of the abbreviated words "Mr." and "Mrs.", which never could be met in The Pioneer Pravda...

Later that winter, Mom decided that I needed to get my squint corrected, it was not right to leave it as it was. 
I never suspected I had anything of the sort.
She took me to an oculist at the Detachment Hospital and he peeped in my eyes through a narrow hole in the blindingly shining mirror circle that he wore on his white cap.
Then the nurse dropped some unpleasantly cold drops into my eyes and told me to come next time alone because I was already big enough to learn the way to their office. 

When going home after the next visit, I suddenly lost the sharpness of vision: the light of lamps on posts along the empty winter road turned into blurred yellow spots and when at home I opened a book the lines on the page were just unfocused strings. 
I got scared but Mom said it's Okay only I had to wear glasses so the following two years I had plastic-rimmed glasses. 

(…my eyes were straightened and made look at things at the same angle but the vision in the left one remained unfocused.
When being checked at the oculist’s I cannot see their pointer or finger directed at the check table.
However, as it turned out, you can live your life with only one working eye.
The squint was gone, however, the expression of my eyes doesn’t match.
It’s easy to notice on a photo when screening my eyes in turn: the inquiring interested look from the right eye gets changed with the deadly indifference in the left one.
I notice the same discrepancy in close-ups of some movie actors and think to myself if they also had been treated for a squint or maybe we all are spied on by other world unknown forces through their left eye…) 

And again the summer came but the volleyball was played no longer.
In the volleyball grounds under the Bugorok Knoll, they made two big concrete squares for playing gorodki game. 
They even organized a championship.
For two days the sticks of wooden bats clapped sharply at the concrete, sweeping the wooden pins of gorodki out of the squares towards the wall of the Bugorok sandy slope. 

The news reached me with a snail delay, yet I still witnessed the final – the single combat of the two masters who, even from the distant position, could knock out the most complicated of the gorodki figures—‘the letter’—with just three throws of their bats and didn’t spend more than one throw at such figures as ‘the cannon’ or ‘Anna-girl at the window’.

The tournament was over, the concrete squares were left and we, children, continued the game with fragments of the tin-cuffed bats and split gorodki pins. 
And when even the remnants got worn out of existence and the concrete squares lost in the high grass, the level grounds by the Bugorok side remained our favorite meeting place.
If going out to the courtyard you could see no one to play with then going over to the Bugork you'd find your playmates there.

And we not only played, we shared knowledge about the wide world around.
That the sticky grass ‘soldiers’ whose leaves looked like scales stuck to its stalk was edible and the sorrel too, but not the ‘horse sorrel’, of course.
And when you get a fresh scratch on your knee or elbow after a nasty fall just apply the underneath part of the Cart Track leaf. 

Or, say, the long-leaved green plants in a swamp, they are also edible only you have to peel the leaves off and get to the white core.
Here you are! Try it!

 We learned what kind of stones you had to strike against each other for sending forth a trickle of pale sparks.
One must be a flint and the other a turbid yellow one which after issuing the sparks had some strange, both attractive and disgusting, smell of seared chicken skin.
In games and communion, we learned the world and learned ourselves. 

‘Would we play Hide-and-seek?’
‘No go. Two is too few for the game.' 
‘There are two more. Coming back from the swamp in a minute.’
‘Went to the swamp? What for?’
‘Wanking.’
Soon the two boys came from the swamp giggling, each one with a whisker of grass in his hands.
I did not know what those bunches of grass were meant for neither had I any clear idea what ‘wanking’ was about.
By the grunts and giggles of boys at hearing the word, I could only guess that it's something bad and wrong. 

All my life I have been a champion of righteousness.
Everything should be as right as a rain.
Seeing something’s not right just puts my back up.
If, say, a grown-up piggy with brazen squeals sucks on a cow's udder, I'm tempted to disperse them. 
And look at the cow too! So resigned and obedient! 
As if she doesn’t know that milk is for calves and people only.

That’s why I stood akimbo and met the comers with the question:
‘So what? Got a wank?’
And then I found out that righteousness supporters sometimes better keep quiet.
And it's a crying shame that I could so easily be stretched on the ground in an unexpected brush. 

The football was played in the grassy field between the Bugorok and the garbage enclosure.
First, the teams' captains were determined by their age, height and the volume of their yells. 
Then the boys, in pairs, went aside and put heads together:
‘You’re 'hammer' and I’m 'tiger'. Okay?’
‘No! I’m 'rocket', you’re 'tiger'.’
With the placeholder nicknames agreed upon, they returned to the captains-to-be and asked the one whose turn it was to choose:
'Well, 'rocket' or 'tiger'?’
With the human resources divided, the game began.

How I wanted to become a captain!
And such a one that all the boys would want to get into my team.
But the dream remained just a dream.

I diligently ran in the grass: from one football goal to the other.
I was desperate to win.
I wanted so much...
It’s only that I could not get to the ball.
At times the ball rolled toward me, but before I got prepared to kick it the swarm of ‘ours’ and ‘theirs’ came racing around and send it far afield.
And again I ran across the field, back and forth, and yelled, ‘Pass! Me here!’, but no one listened to me and everybody else screamed also and ran and the game rolled on without, in fact, my participation...

In summer all of our family, except for Grandma Martha, went to Konotop, to the wedding of Mom’s sister Lyudmila and the region’s champion of weightlifting in the third weight class, young but rapidly balding Anatoly Arkhipenko from the city of Sumy, the center of the same-named region.
A truck with a canvas top took us through the Object's Checkpoint – the white gate in the barbed-wire fence surrounding the Zone, to the Valdai railway station where we boarded a local train to the Bologoye Station to change trains there.

The car was empty with no one but us on the wooden yellow benches between the green walls.
I liked the gentle sway in time with the clatter of wheels on rail joints beneath the floor. 
And I liked to look out of the big window watching the dark pillars of logs along the railway that kept running up and immediately falling behind; they carried the endlessly unrolling path of sagging wires on their crossbars.
At the halts, the train stood for a long time giving way to the faster and more important trains. 

One especially long stay was at the station of Dno.
I read the name in the glassed signboard on the green wall of planks of its shed.
And it was only when a single steam engine puff-puffed past the shed unhurriedly piercing with its long black body the curly white cloud of its steam that out train moved on.

(...I remembered that station and the long gleaming-black engine crawling through the white fog of the steam after I read that at the station of Dno, Colonel of the Russian Army Nikolay Romanov signed his renunciation of the royal throne. 
However, by that act, he didn’t save himself, nor his wife, nor the children of their royal family whom at the execution they were finishing off with the rifle bayonets.
I did not know all that sitting in the local train by the shabby shed.
And I also did not know that it does not matter whether I know it or not.
One way or the other, all that is part of me. 
It’s me…
Anyway, it's good that we don't know all in childhood...) 

Most of the houses along the Nezhin Street in the city of Konotop stood a bit back from the road, behind their fences which reflected the degree of prosperity of the owner and the main stages in the evolution of the fencing technology.

However, Number 19 briefly interrupted the line of miscellaneous fences on the left side of the street with its wall whitewashed ages ago. 
The wall had two windows and four wooden shutters to close the windows for the night.
The entrance to the house was from the yard after passing the narrow gate of planks.
To be more precise, they entered the house through four entrances – two doors in each of the two wooden verandas.

The first verandas from the street with its both doors, as well as the half of the whole house belonged then to Ignat Pilluta and his wife Pilutikha and it was their pair of windows overlooking the Nezhin Street.

The second veranda, hidden in a vine with wide green leaves and pale clusters of small never ripening berries, was divided in two by a blind partition lengthwise.
The part of the house, aka hutta, of our Grandma Katerina Ivanovna comprised the half-dark hallway-veranda, the kitchen with one window, facing the two stairs under the veranda entrance door, opposite the window there was a brick stove and the door to the one and only room of the hutta.
The room also had a window filled with the eternal twilight under the giant elm outside, shading the whole hutta and half of the Turkovs' yard, the neighbors at Number 17. 

And around the far corner in the second veranda, there was the last, fourth door to the hutta of the old man Duzenko and wife. 
They also had just a kitchen and a room but there were two windows more than in Grandma Katya's hutta because of the symmetry in the layout – the two windows looking to the street called for two windows looking to the yard. 

Under each of the Duzenkos' yard windows grew a huge American Maple with pointed tips in their open-palm leaves. 
Between the two maples old Duzenko kept one and a breast-high stack of red bricks, brittle with their age, for a possible restructuring of his hutta in future.

About six meters away from the maples and bricks and parallel to them, stretched a long shed of gray-black decrepit boards in its blind wall sectioned by the doors with padlocks.
Their respective owners kept there the fuel for the winter and in Grandma Katya's section lived a pig named Masha. 
Opposite the verandas with barren vine, one more elm and a plank-fence bordered the yard from the neighbors in Number 21. 

Under that elm there stood a separate shed plastered with the mixture of clay, cow dung, and chopped straw, the earth-cellar of the Pillutas was inside. 
The Duzenkos’ earth-cellar shed of bare planks stood deeper in the yard and as if continued the fuel sheds separated from them by the passage to the kitchen gardens.
In between those two earth-cellar sheds, there was a small lean-to structure covering the lid over Grandma Katya's earth-cellar – a two-meter deep vertical well-like pit with a wooden ladder going down into the dark between the narrow ground walls. 
At the bottom, the flashlight showed four caves-niches dug on all four sides, a little deeper than the pit bottom. 
That’s where they stored potatoes and carrots for the winter, and beets too because the frost couldn’t reach the vegetables at such depth.

In the corner formed by the Duzenko's and Grandma Katya's earth-cellar sheds there also was a kennel with a black-and-white dog Zhulka chained to his house. 
He tinkled the chain and whipped it against the ground, furiously barking at any stranger entering the yard.
But I made friends with him on the very first evening when, on Mom’s advice, I took out and dumped into his iron plate the leftovers after supper.
