
Grandma Katya’s hair was quite gray and a little wavy.
She had it cut to the middle of her neck and held with a plastic semi-circular comb beneath the back of her head. 
The color of her hair contrasted to the slightly swarthy skin of her face with a thin nose and a bit too round, as if frightened, eyes.
And in the dusky only room there on the blind wall hung a photographic portrait of a black-haired woman with an aristocratic hairdo and a necktie in the fashion of the late twenties New Economic Policy era – Grandma Katya in her young years. 
Next to her portrait, there was an equally big sized  photo of a man with a heavy Jack London’s chin in a Russian collar shirt and black jacket, that’s her husband Joseph when he was still working as the trade auditor before his exile to the North and subsequent disappearance with the Germans retreat from Konotop.

I liked the visit to Grandma Katya, although there were neither gorodki nor football playing but daily Hide-and-seek with the children from neighbor huttas who would never find you if you had hidden in Zhulka’s kennel.
In the evening rare yellow lamps lit up on the log pillars along the street without dispersing the night dark even beneath themselves. 
May beetles flew with a bomber buzz above the soft black dust of the road yet so low that you could knock them down with your jacket or a leafy branch.

We put the captives in empty matchboxes and they scratched the boxes from within with their long awkward legs.
The following day, we opened their cages to admire the fan-like mustaches and the glossy color of their backs.
And we tried to feed them with grass blades pieces but they did not seem hungry and we let them fly from our palms same way as ladybugs.
The beetle crawled ticklishly up the fingers, tossed its rigid forewings up to straighten the long transparent wings packed under that protective case and flew off with low buzzing. 
Okay, fly wherever you want – in the evening we’ll catch more...

One day from the far end of the street there came dissonant wails tangled with measured bumps.
To the sounds of the familiar cacophony, the Nezhin Street people went out of their yards and standing by their gates informed each other whose funeral it was.
In front of the procession, three men were marching slowly pressing to their lips the brass of unsteadily sobbing trumpets.
The fourth carried a drum in front of him like a huge potbelly.
After walking as long as was needed, he beat it on the side with a felted stick. 
The drum was fastened with a wide belt across the drummer’s back leaving his both hands free.
He held a copper plate in his left hand and from time to time clashed it against the other such plate screwed upon the drum rim and the trumpets responded with a new wave of disparate wailing.

After the musicians, they carried a large photo portrait of a sullen man and several wreaths with white lettered inscriptions on black ribbons. 
A medium platform truck followed the wreaths purring its engine.
On the platform with the unfastened sides stood an openwork monument of rebar coated with silver paint.
Two men grasped it from both sides and at their feet lay a coffin with the deceased.
A small nondescript crowd closed the slow procession.

I did not dare to go out into the street although there were Mom and Aunt Lyudmila standing at the gate and the neighbors with their children by their huttas. 
But still, driven by curiosity, I climbed the gate from inside to peep over it.
The lead-colored nose stuck from the pallid dead face looked so horrible that I fled back to the kennel of the black-and-white Zhulka who also was uneasily whining…

Grandma Katya knew the way of tying an ordinary handkerchief into a mouse with ears and a tail and, putting it on her palm scratched its head with a finger of her other hand.
Then the mouse made a sudden sharp jump trying to flee but Grandma Katya would catch it on the fly and put it back to lightly stroke on under our eager laughter. 
I realized that it was her who pushed the mouse but no matter how hard I try I could crack the puzzle of her doing that.

In the evening she took out a bucket of the sourly smelling slop of peelings and scraps to her section in the mutual shed where pig Masha was grunting impatiently. 
There Grandma Katya would stand over slurping Masha and scold her for some thing or another.

She showed us which vegetable beds and trees were hers so that we did not play around with the neighbors’ because there was no fencing in the gardens.
But the apples were not ripe yet and I climbed the tree of white mulberry though Grandma Katya warned that I was too heavy for such a young tree.
One day it indeed split under me in two.
I scared the punishment but Dad did not beat me.
He squeezed the halves of the split tree tightly together with some yellowish semi-transparent cable. 
And Grandma Katya did not reproach me but only blinked her eyes sadly.
In the evening she said that the pig hadn't eaten anything at all and knocked the bucket over and that animal was so clever and felt that next day they would slaughter her.

In the morning when the butcher came Grandma Katya left her hutta and already in her absence they were pulling frantically screaming Masha out of her section, chasing about the yard and slaughtering with a long knife to pierce the pig’s heart after which the screech changed to a prolonged wheeze.
Throughout that time Mom kept us, the children, in the hutta and she allowed me to go out only when they were scorching it with a blowtorch.

At Aunt Lyudmila’s wedding, sliced lard and fried cutlets, and chilled-out pork jelly stood on the table.
One of the guests volunteered to teach the bride how to stuff a home-made sausage but she refused and the guests laughed.

In general, I liked Konotop although I felt sorry for Masha and ashamed for the split mulberry tree.
For some reason, I even liked the taste of the corn bread.
Everyone was cursing it but still buying – there was no other bread because Nikita Khrushchev declared the corn to be the queen of the fields.

We were returning to the Object also by train.
I felt sick and dizzy but eventually, there was found a window in the car where you could stick your head out. 
And I watched as the green chain of our train cars bent into a long arc rolled around the green field.
It seemed to me that our travel did not end because the train ran along the same huge circle in the middle of the field with groves here and there. 
At some of the stops, Dad left the car and did not come back at the departure. 
I was scared that we would remain without our Dad and started to whine pitifully.
But a few minutes later he appeared along the car aisle carrying ice cream because of which he lingered on the platform and jumped into another car of the departing train…

That year my younger sister and brother also went to school and at the end of August, my Dad with an angrily reddened face took Grandma Martha to Bologoye to help her change trains to Ryazan. 
When saying 'goodbye', she sobbed a little and Dad said: 
‘Again? Started again!’
Then she kissed all the three of her grandkids and was gone from my life…

Across the road opposite the corner buildings of our Block, there was a grocery store and, after Grandma Martha had left, my Mom was sending me there for small purchases: bread, matches, salt or vegetable oil. 
More important products she bought herself: meat, potatoes, sore cream or chocolate butter.
For holidays large beads of red or small beads of black caviar were bought.
The Object was well catered for.
And only ice cream was brought to the store once a month and immediately sold out. 
As for the tasty corn bread, I never saw it in that store.

To the right of the store, near the turn of the road surrounding the Block, the wall of the forest was slightly cleft by a narrow glade.
The car repair ramp made of sturdy logs provided another gathering place for children to play.

‘Let’s run!’ called a familiar boy to me. ‘They’ve caught a hedgehog!’
I saw the hedgehog only in pictures and hurried to the scream-and-shouting group of boys.
With the sticks in their hands they blocked the way for the animal to flee to the forest and when the hedgehog folded into a defensive gray-brown ball of needles they rolled it with the same sticks into a small brook.
In the water, the hedgehog unfolded, stuck his sharp muzzle with the black blob of the nose out from under the needles and tried to escape through the grass on his short crooked legs. 
He was again spread on the ground.
 A stick pressed across his belly did not allow him to curl up again.
‘Look!’ shouted one of the boys. ‘He’s constipated! Cannot shit!’
To prove the statement, the boy poked a stalk of some rank grass into a dark bulge between the animal’s hind legs.
‘The turd is too hard. He needs help.’
I recollected how Grandma Martha had saved me.

Someone in the company had pliers. 
The animal was crucified on the earth with a few additional sticks and the self-proclaimed vet pulled the jammed turd with the pliers.
The turd, however, was not ending and turned out to be a bluish-white color.
‘You fool! You tore his guts out!’ cried another boy.
The hedgehog was set free and once again made for the forest dragging the pulled out part of the intestine behind.
All followed to check what would happen next.

I didn’t want to see any more of that and was rescued by my sister Natasha who came running from the Block to say that Mom was calling me.
I immediately left the party of boys and returned with her to the courtyard.
There I talked to Mom, to some neighbors, did something and all the time was thinking  one and the same thought formulated in a clear-cut, not childish way:
‘How can I go on living after what I’ve seen? How to live with it?’

(...but still and yet, I survived. 
The blessing property of human memory, its forgetfulness recorded by Vladimir Dahl in his dictionary, saved me.
However, in a series of examples of the savage brutality of men, turning even their likes into deformed pieces of meat, that hedgehog comes the first, dragging through the dry grass a grayish damp part of its rectum with small pieces of dry earth stuck to it. 
And I live to understand that low brutes need high-flying excuses for their barbarity: 
...to alleviate sufferings…
...as a sacred revenge…
...for the sake of race cleansing…

However, to be entirely frank: is there any guarantee that I myself under no circumstances would do anything of the sort?
I don’t know…)

When you are a child there is no time to look back at all those series in your memory. 
You have to go on—further and beyond—to new discoveries. 
If only you’ve got the nerve to keep the course.

Once, after a slight deviation to the left from the usual ‘school – home’ route, I went deeper into the deciduous part of the forest.
On a gently rising hillock, I went across four trees that grew a couple of meters apart from each other in the corners of an almost regular square. 
Smooth wide trunks without branches stretched upwards where at the height of six to seven meters there was a platform. 
The crossbeams from the stumps of thick boughs nailed to one of the trees formed the ladder to the platform.
Who did that and what for?
I don’t know. All I know is that I didn’t have it in me to climb that desolate platform discovered in the forest.

Much easier went on the discovery of the basement world.
I ascended there with my Dad to bring the firewood for Titan the Boiler to heat water for bathing.
The bulbs down there were missing and Dad took with us a flashlight with a spring lever protruding from the handle.
When you squeezed the flashlight in your hand the lever hid into the handle; you loosened the grip and the lever popped out again.
Squeeze and loosen, squeeze and loosen and inside the handle there starts the buzz of the awaken dynamo-machine producing the current for the flash lamp.
The faster you rotate the buzzing dynamo the brighter is the light from the lamp.

A circle of light hopped along the walls and cemented floor in the left corridor of the basement at the end of which was our section.
The walls in the narrow corridor were made of boards as well as the sections’ doors with hanging padlocks.
Behind our door, there was a square room with two concrete walls and the wooden partition from the neighboring section. 
Dad unlocked the padlock and turned on the bulb in our section.
The bright light showed a high stock of evenly sawed logs of wood against the wall opposite the door, and all sorts of household things hanging from the walls or piled on shelves: the sled, the tools, the skies. 
After a pair of logs was chopped with the ax I collected the chips for kindling Titan the Boiler and a pair of thicker wood pieces and Dad grabbed a whole armful. 

Sometimes Dad was tinkering with something or sawing logs in our basement section and I, bored by waiting, would go out in the corridor with a narrow barred ditch along the cemented floor.
Through the open door, the bulb threw a clear rectangle of light on the opposite section wall while the far end of the corridor from where we had come was lost in the dark. 
But I was not afraid of anything because behind my back my Dad was working in his old black sailor’s pea jacket with two rows of copper buttons with embossed anchors...

The firewood got to the basement in early autumn.
In the center of the side wall of our house, there was a cemented pit under a lid made of sheet metal. 
Slightly above the pit's bottom, an opening of 50 cm x 50 cm led through the foundation into the basement corridor at about a meter and a half above its cemented floor. 
Near that pit, a truck would dump a pile of ruffly chopped logs which were to be dropped into the pit and then through the opening into the basement and further taken to the section of whom the firewood was brought for. 

As I was already a big boy, Dad instructed me to throw the wood pieces into the pit so that he could drag them through the opening down to the basement. 
I could not see him but heard his voice from down there when he shouted me to stop if the pile of logs in the pit threatened with a gridlock in the opening.
Then there came muffled knocking as the logs fell on the cemented floor of the corridor.

Everything went quite well until Natasha told Sasha that they had brought the firewood for us and I was helping Dad to move the logs to the basement.
Shasha came running and began to drag the logs from the pile and drop them to the pit.
To all my stormy explanations that he violates age limit for participation in such works, and that the additional logs dropped by him would surely cause a gridlock in the opening he answered with obstinate snuffling and silently went on.

(...the rhetoric is useless to those whose Stubbornness-Mommy was born a moment before them!.. ) 

But I not only talked, I threw the logs too, so that later at midday meal in the kitchen Sasha would not say that he did more than me…
And suddenly he recoiled from the pit, pressing his hand to his face, and blood appeared from under his fingers.
Natasha rushed home to call Mom who came running with a damp cloth to wipe the blood off Sasha’s upturned face.
Dad also came running from the basement and no one listened to my defense that it happened all by accident and not on purpose when a piece of wood thrown by me scratched skin on my brother’s nose.
Mom yelled at Dad how he could allow all that to happen.
Dad also grew angry and told everyone to go home and finished the work himself.
The scratch healed even without the patch which Sasha stubbornly peeled off from his nose even before the midday meal.

(...hardly that my brother would remember all that, it’s only me who recollects and feels guilty: so what if even it was not deliberately? — instead of screaming orations I should have looked better where I was tossing…)

At school, I constantly enrolled in this or that Group, whenever its tutor came to our classroom to recruit volunteers. 
Meetings were held in the late afternoon so that participants had time to go home, have their midday meal and come back to school. 
After learning and training in a Group, its members returned home already in the darkness of the night. 

One evening after the Group activities were over a bunch of participants dropped into the school gym where there was a piano on the stage behind the closed curtain and where one boy showed me once that if you hit only the black keys then it sounds like Chinese music. 
But that evening I forgot all about the music because there on the stage were several boys from the senior grades and they had a pair of real boxing gloves!
We dared to ask permission to touch their shiny leather and try them on.

They allowed us generously and then decided to have a match between the sprats, one from the Gorka—that is living in some of the two Blocks—and another from the “lowlanders”  dwelling in the wooden houses at the bottom of the Gorka hill.
The choice fell on me—O! And I wanted it so much!—and red-haired fatty Vovka from the “lowlanders”.
There was not enough light on the stage to hold the match.
All of us went under the light bulb in the gym hallway with the ink-black winter darkness behind the wide pane glass and they told me and Vovka to fight.

At first we both giggled punching each other with the bulky balls of gloves but then grew hot and angry.
I wanted so much to hit him on the head and in his eyes read that he also was eager to knock me off. 
Soon my left shoulder which parried all his blows was terribly aching and my right hand that kept beating against his shoulder weakened to the utmost.
Probably, he had it no better than me.
Our giggling turned into puffing and gasping.

It was bad and unbearably painful because his blows seemed to penetrate to the very bone of the forearm, but I would rather die than surrender. 
At last, the big boys got bored with such a monotony, they told us ‘enough’ and took away their gloves.
The next morning a purple-black bruise decorated my left forearm.
For several days I was very touchy at that point and even a friendly pat made me crouch and hiss like a gander…

If there was powder snow and not too deep all of our family went out into the courtyard to clean the carpet and the runner.
We spread them face down on the snow and stamped on the back.
Then the carpet was turned over, the snow around it was swept with a broom all over the carpet's face and swept off back again.
Done. 
And we folded the carpet.
The long green runner remained face down after the stamping and the four of us—Mom and the three children—gathered upon it and Dad was dragging the runner through the snowdrifts with all of us standing on the runner's back, leaving a crumpled dust-smeared furrow in the snow behind.
Yes, our Dad's really strong!

And after a slushy snowfall, the boys in our courtyard began to roll the snow up into huge lumps and build a fortress. 
To start with, you make a snowball and put it on a snowdrift and roll it back and forth. 
The lump immediately swells with layers of sticky slush snow.
It grows above your knees, becomes denser, heavier and you have to call for help and, in a team of two or three, roll it to the building site.
The big boys hoist and perch the dense snow lumps on the circular wall that's already higher than you.
We divide into two groups –  the fortress defenders and those who'll assault it. 
The ammunition of snowballs prepared and the assault began.
Shrieks, yells, babel; snowballs swishing from all the sides and in every direction.
I stick out my head above the wall of the fortress so as to hit someone with my snowball but a yellow lightning flashes suddenly in my eyes, like a burst of an electric bulb.
With my back against the wall I slip down, my hands pressed to the eye hit with a snowball.

(… “oh, yes – and I was also killed...”,  so was described that moment by poet Gumilev…)

And the battle rages on, and no one cares about you.
Everything got fused in one general uproar:
‘A-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah!’

The battle was over, the fortress never surrendered but turned into a hillock of snow trampled firm and hard as ice.
But the roar did not stop, we're still yelling and sliding down the hillock on our bellies.
Some hollow deafness had filled your head because of your own and mutual crazy howl:
‘A-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah!’

My eye can see already.
I slap up a snowball and hit the head of a boy older than me.
What a mistake!
Firstly, the battle is over and that boy has come with his skates on.

What made me so reckless?
As always, trying to keep things in proper order, so that everything was right.
At the start of the fortress construction, the eldest boys—seven and eight graders—announced "who does not build will not play". 
And I know for sure that the boy in skates was not among the builders.
But who cares now about the righteous justice?
Many of the founding boys have already left. 
Others have completely forgotten the declaration. 
But there is no time to explain the reasons for your audacity and there is no one who will come to your help, so – run for your life!

And I plunged headlong towards the entrance door of our house.
Maybe he won't catch up?
Running, exhausted with many hours of wild playing, I'm still running. 
The entrance door is already so close!
‘And if he’ll catch up?’ flashes in my head and I get a skate in the ass for such an inappropriate fear.
Slamming the door I fly through the vestibule where he dares not follow – it’s someone else’s house…

(...if you want that everything worked out as it should you mustn’t doubt that so it would…)

In the spring my parents tried their hand at farming.
That is, they decided to plant potatoes.
When with a spade and a bagful of potatoes they started for the forest after work, I begged them to take me too.
We went to an endless clearing, the former border of the Zone before it was expanded.
Dad made holes in the soil that he turned the day before and Mom dropped potatoes into them.
The parents’ faces were sad and Dad shook his head doubtfully.
It’s not the right soil, it’s just a loam. 
Nothing would grow here.
The quiet spring twilight thickened and we went home.

(...a little anticipatory, I’ll say that the attempted kitchen garden had yielded nothing.
Because of the loam or the unnecessary doubt in your business?
But more strange is why did they start it at all? 
To save costs for potatoes?
But we were not so poor then.

In the parents' room there appeared a folding sofa, two armchairs with lacquered armrests and a three-legged coffee table, all in all, named furniture set. 
Probably, they wanted to take a break from all that furniture so the potatoes just served an excuse for going to the forest…) 

And again it was summer only it started much earlier than in previous years.
And together with summer, the Rechka river came into my life. 
Or maybe, the limits of my living space had already expanded to it. 

To start the relations with the Rechka I needed a company of more advanced boys to go downhill along the road with the heat-softened pitch at the joints of its concrete slabs. 
I knew that stretch very well because of my visits to the Detachment Library.
Then we took an unfamiliar shortcut along a tread-path through the thicket on a steep slope until there unfurled the sparkling sunlit flow of the Rechka lapping among innumerable boulders of all sizes.

All the ten-meter-wide river might be crossed without getting deeper than to the waist.
Or you could just stand knee-deep in the fast current and watch as a school of translucent whitebait poked ticklingly at your legs in the greenish twilight of the unstoppably rolling mass of water. 
When out of the river, we played  ‘key-or-lock?’: tries at guessing the would-be form of splash from the stone before throwing it in the water.
If the water splashed up in a single stick, that’s ‘key’; a wider, bush-like splash went for ‘lock’.
In controversial cases, the final decision was made by the boy who played football better or whose flat pebble would do more jumps when ‘baking pancakes’ over the water surface.

Soon I began to go to the Rechka alone or with just one partner but on the river bank, we parted because we came there for fishing. 
All the tackle was a fishing pole from a cut-down willow whip with a length of line tied from its tip. 
The line ended with a hook and a tiny lead sinker before it and a float. 
The float could be made of a brownish wine cork, or be bought from the store — a plucked and pared goose feather painted red-and-white: both popped equally well on the rushing ripples of the rapid current and became thoughtfully still in a small backwater behind boulders…

Fishing is something personal.
One guy pins his hopes on that quiet inlet, the other prefers to have his float hopping on the rapids.
That’s why companions get parted on the river bank.

Fishing is a rushing surge of excitement whenever the float starts at least once.
Hush! Baiting!
The line does not yield, it jibs, bends the pole, cuts the water in zigzags then suddenly gives up and jumping over your head carries to you the sparkling flutter of the caught fish! 
Then, of course, it turns to be not a fish but a small fry.
Never mind! 
The next catch will be tha-a-at big!

More often than anything else there was one of the ‘miserables’ on the hook.
I don’t know their scientific name.
Those fools got caught even by a bare hook with no bait at all.
And they might be hooked at any part of them – at the tail, or belly, or an eye.
Who would care about classifying such morons?

From fishing, I usually brought half a dozen of small fry in a milk-can and Polinna Zimin's cat devoured them with purr and rumble from a saucer put on the landing tiles… 

That day I started fishing from the bridge between the Pumping Station and the Checkpoint on the road out from the Zone. 
I walked as usual after the current, refreshing the bait, adjusting the depth of the hook immersion.
I was an attentive fisherman and only once allowed myself to deviate.
There on a sandy spit near the green bush, I carried out some restoration work to mend the sand sculpture of a woman lying on her back. 
It was created a couple of days before by two soldiers.
You could guess at once that they were soldiers by their black underpants and black boots. 
Who else would wear boots in summer?

I increased the sagging breasts and rounded the hips of the sculpture.
They seemed to be wider than necessary but I did not correct it.
Why did I do it at all?
Very clear, it’s not right to let the work of art to disappear in the rest of sand with all the soldiers’ labor gone to ashes…

(...or was I hooked on the opportunity to spank a female bust and thighs even if just made of sand?
Eew! To hell with Freud and other psychoanalytic schools! 
Let's go back fishing, it’s much more interesting…)

...and I did not roll on top of her like one of the soldiers two days before but just went on fishing.

The current brought the float to the broken dam below the stadium, where ages ago I stumbled off the insidious slab.
So half of the Rechka had been already passed, one half more and it would go beyond the Zone, away from the barbed wire on two rows of poles with the strip of loosened ground in between to catch footprints of the spies.
Half of the way was over and the three-liter milk-can contained just a couple of ‘miserables’.
The cat would be disappointed.
