
With so reliable fasteners, on Sundays, I was taking to the wood for all day long. 
The endless well-trodden ski track stretched from beyond of anything to another one.
At times the ski track bifurcated and two tracks ran along side by side.
I liked the sound of skies slapping at the ski track.
On the way, I sometimes met single soldier-skiers that enjoyed their Sundays without the army greatcoats just in uniform shirts without the belts around. 

The unswerving ski track led to my favorite gliding spot – a deep combe where the speed gained by the onrush down one slope took you almost to one-third of the opposite one. 
I was delighted by it and proud that I could plunge like those solitary soldiers although falling at times especially at the jump ramp they built of snow for their jumps.

One day I noticed a secluded ski track diverging from the mainline track which—as I gradually figured it out—was running along the controlling clearing of the Zone-Object-Detachment before its expansion. 
The branching ski track led me to a magnificent ski-plunge slope in the depth of the thicket.
Though the slope was grown with perennial fir-giants dictating an abrupt turn at the bottom, but, if you did not fall at that point, the plunge took you unimaginably far away with the speed squeezing tears from your eyes and making repeat the plunge again and again… 

The next Sunday I almost did not fall at that tricky turn and rode the slope until very late when the deep violet shadows began to trickle down from the fir trees dense branches bent with the thick layer of snow. 
Then all of a sudden there came a strange feeling that I was not alone and someone was watching me from behind the backs of the mighty firs.
At first, it was scary but then I listened to the good-will silence of the surrounding forest and realized that it was him, the forest, friendly spying on me because we were one – me and the forest. 
The twilight deepened and I remembered that the Block was more than two kilometers away.

(...Of course, I got home in the dark and Mom let me have it…
Yet, until now when remembering that deep violet winter twilight and the quietness of the friendly forest I know that I lived not just so.

The same sense of dissolution and being a part to everything else around, when you cannot say where your “I” ends and turns into “not-me”, I lived through once again in Karabakh.
Only that time I was the watcher and it happened in summer instead of winter.
Though, telling this story somewhat violates the linear flow of the narrative and goes against the grain of the classical canons of the time-place-action unity, but, after all, it’s my letter and it’s my life and why not to take turns to my liking.
So...)

In Stepanakert, I cannot be seen a day or two before my birthday and about as long after it. 
Because for that period I go to freedom.

(...see? It’s very convenient to be born in summer…)

My local relatives have already ceased to be surprised or get angry.
They decided that it’s an old, odd but established Ukrainian tradition – to go away for your birthday and walk just where your eyes look.
And right that way it was in August (I don’t remember the exact year) end nineties.  
No later, because I have had this tent since the end of the millennium. 

That August I went north through the woods on tumbs where there were no villages but the views of inexpressible beauty. 
Just as my Mom warned me, “You’ll be there alone.”
After a day-long climbing up an ascending ridge of tumbs where the woods are replaced with the alpine meadows, I came across some soot-black pieces of slate and several charred poles.
Apparently, before the war shepherds were coming there with their flocks and they brought the construction materials to build a hovel.
And who burned it?
Well, you never know…
A lightning could strike too…
Anyway, nothing of my business.

I went on – higher, and in a saddle bridging two tumbs I saw an ancient tomb.
How did I guess its antiquity?
An easy question. 
It was excavated. 
Someone had been looking for a buried treasure.
There remained a hole in the ground and four to five roughly hewn stone slabs, half a ton each.
They didn’t bury that way under the socialism, nor in the capitalist epoch.
The nearby crests were not rocky so the slabs had to be transported from afar.
What for?
Well, one look around would remove the question – you’re in the middle of incredible beauty: the sky without any limit, the motionless rolling waves of the tumbs; the distant ones covered with woods, the nearby with meadows.
But to bring the slabs from as far as even I don’t know where would call for a plum sum of money, or real power, or both.
The clues are more than enough – it was one of the Karabakh melique-princes. 
One day he rode out hunting, reached that place and fell in love with it and didn’t want to part with it even after his demise.
A nagging flaw in the calculations: the greed of ashes desecrators was not taken into account.
See?
We can solve any enigma of the history when there’s no one to oppose our tall stories.

I passed over to the next tumb and on its summit got under the rain.
For such occasions, I've got a special and rather practical technique. 
I take off all my clothes and pack them into a cellophane bag and start to dance in altogether under the downpour.
Dancing, in this case, is not a pagan ritual, it's for keeping warm; up in the mountains without the sun and under the rain it's really chilly, take my word. 
Yet, probably, there is something from paganism in it too, otherwise where my uncontrollable yells would come from.
Anyway, solitude has certain advantages – you don’t get arrested for violation of public order.
With the rain over, I dry myself with the sweater and put on the dry clothes from the bag, ain’t I a smart guy?

But that time after one rain there came another and my second dancing was not so enthusiastic as the first.
The additional rain also stopped after all and I prepared to stay overnight in a shallow hollow so that the wind would not gnaw at me too much.
About midnight the drops of one more rain tap-tapped on my sleeping bag and I realized that I was kaput.
A raging stream of rainwater ran down the hollow, I struggled out of the sleeping bag put it on my back and stood with my legs wide apart giving way to the running spate.
I could not leave the hollow either – the squally wind joined the rain.
There was nothing to do but wait for the dawn in the posture of the letter "z" clutching my knees with my hands under the soaked through and through sleeping bag on my back and the rivulet running between my feet. 
The uncontrollable inside tremor mixed with the outside lashing by chilly rains which I lost count of that night.

The morning started with a thick fog, but without rain and the wind was falling.
Shaking like an epileptic, I squeezed the water out of my clothes and the sleeping bag, as much as it was possible for my cold-stiffened hands.
I had no desire to go any further.
Hearth and home were all I craved for.
I went back but walking did not warm me. 
I was busy being trembling.

Normally, going downhill is easier than going uphill, but for me, that difference, for some reason, was gone, and at times I was kind of like floating while to the hearths of civilization there remained at least a day of normal walking. 
And then I remembered the slate – it’s much closer if only I could find it.
It's somewhere along the edge of the wood. 
And down that tumb I was descending in zigzags so as not miss the slate pieces in the tall grass.
And I did find the place.

Festered with the sticky shivering tremor I started to restore the shed and the work warmed me better than walking.
What I constructed looked like a crude tent of fire-smeared slate pieces.
It was tall enough for sitting inside on the ground and more than enough for stretching in it with the whole length of the body. 
Then I built the fire at the entrance with the wreckage of poles and deadwood that I dragged from the nearby forest. 
I warmed my sides by the fire and began to dry up the sleeping bag.
When the color of its fabric turned lighter and stopped issuing any steam I realized that I'd survive. 

All the next day the sun was shining blindingly but I had a slanted roof of slates over my head supported by the charred poles walked by the soundless lizards as lazy as I was because in all the day I went out just once – to collect an armful of grass to spread it under the sleeping bag on the ground.

And so it went day after day without any changes if not for the growing company – cautious mice joined me and the lizards.
They did not dare to step over the fire ashes so I left a piece of baked potato outside, but the rest, together with bread and cheese, hung in the haversack under the slate. 

At nights the full moon rose, filling the world with clear-cut shadows.

On one of those well illuminated nights I went out to take a leak and on the way through the tall grass there burst from under my feet a fluttering brood of partridges with the cry:
‘Damn sleepwalker! Watch your step! We’re sleeping here!’
As if they did not scare me! 

In the light of day, over the wide expanse of the valleys, the vultures glided without moving their wings.
From the depths of valleys they had been usually seen far-far above, but laying on my sleeping bag I didn't even have to stick my head out of the slate tent. 
When one of them trespassed the invisible borderline between their hunting grounds the skylord soared higher and, folding his wings fell down upon the intruder like a stone.
I heard the whistling sound of air cut but his dive next to the tent entrance.
He missed, however, or maybe was not keen on hitting but only to shoo off the saucy sneaker.
We all are blood kin after all.

So it went on.
All my business was to roll over from one side to the other, from the belly to the back, having no desires, ambitions, plans. 
Sometimes I fell asleep disregarding the time of day, it made no difference.
Well, and besides I watched, of course.
I watched how beautiful and perfect the world is.
Sometimes I think, maybe the purpose of man’s existence is just seeing this beauty and perfection.
Man’s merely a mirror for the world to look into otherwise it would not know how beautiful it is.

Six days later I had to go back to the civilization. Just for the sake of righteousness.

On my return to all the questions, I only gave one-syllable answers because my vocal cords from being idle for so long became too lazy and I could speak only in a hoarse whisper. 

(...all I want to say is that in both cases—in the winter forest and among the summer tumbs—I had the same feeling that I was not alone and someone else was watching that ski-riding kid and the lazybones prostrate in the shade of burned slate pieces and, more strangely, I was a part of that someone and watched myself from the twilight of the forest and from the tall grass on the tumb slope because we all are involved…
On the whole, some complete mess…)

With the spring nearing, we, the fourth graders, started active preparation for getting admitted to the ranks of young pioneers.
We copied and memorized the Solemn Oath of the Young Leninist.
One day Seraphima Sergeevna entered the classroom after the break with an unknown woman.
She introduced her as the new School Pioneer Leader and said that we were going to have a Leninist Lesson and had to go out into the corridor but keep very quiet because the other classes were having their regular lessons. 

We went out into the long corridor of the second floor where on the wall between the doors to the classes there hung pictures with Lenin in them. 
The Pioneer Leader commenced from the very beginning.
Here, he’s quite a young man, actually a youth, after the execution of his elder brother Alexander by the tsarist regime, consoles his mother with the words ‘We’ll go another way’, which is the name of this famous picture, by the way.
And our class followed her quietly to the poster with his photograph in the group of comrades from the underground committee…

The working silence reigned in school, we passed by the closed doors of the classrooms with the school children inside and only we, like secret conspirators went off the usual course of the school regime and seemed to have joined the life of the underground, following the quiet voice leading us from a picture to a picture… 

Then again the spring came and again the thawed patches appeared on the slope between the Block and the Recruit Depot Barracks but I wasn't checking them anymore. 

On my way from school to home, I took over an unfamiliar girl of my age.
Maybe, from the parallel fourth grade. 
I looked back at her face full of complete unawareness of my presence. 
I had to show her that I was a boy of consequence in the surrounding whereabouts. 
And, by the way, I had a gang around, like Robin Hood, the noble robber.
Turning to the left and still walking on, I speak with the eloquent signs to the Bugorok-Knoll on the other side of the decaying skating rink:
‘Hey! Don’t be so careless! Duck!! Or they’d notice you!’
So, if the snooty girl looked that way no one would be seen there... 

Another time, with the snow already gone, I was passing the same spot and squinting.
Because when you squint without closing your eyes completely but only to the point of eyelash rows touching each other you’d see the world as if through the transparent wings of a dragonfly.
And I, actually, was not walking but flying in a tiny dragonfly-like helicopter that I saw in ‘The Funny Pictures’ because even though I was past the preschool age I still sometimes looked through that magazine for small kids.
And then I remembered how rebellious Kotovsky, in the movie ‘Kotovsky’ at the Regiment Club, answered the arrogant landlord:
‘I am Kotovsky!’
Then he grabbed him and threw through the window panes of the landlord's house. 
And I too grab the rich scoundrel by the breast of his jacket and throw him into the roadside ditch.
I like to call myself with the glorious name:
‘I am Kotovsky!’
And I like to be so strong.
That’s why I re-played the episode several times walking up the road to the Block.
Why not? 
Who would see?
At home, Mom told how she and Polinna Zimin had a hearty laugh watching through the neighbor's window my throws of nobody knew who. 
But I never admitted that I was Kotovsky...

And at the end of April, we became young pioneers. 
The ceremony took place not at school but in front of the House of Officers because there stood the big gypsum head of Lenin on the high pedestal.
The night before Mom ironed my trousers through gauze and the white parade-shirt and the scarlet triangle of pioneer tie.
All those things she hung over the back of a chair so that in the morning everything would be ready.
When there was no one in the room, I touched the soft silk of the pioneer tie.
Mom said she had bought it from the store, but how’s that possible they sell such things.

The bright morning sun was shining.
We, the fourth graders, stood facing the lined-up ranks of the school children.
Our scarlet ties hung on our right arms bent at the elbow, the collars of our shirts turned up for the senior graders to easily tie our ties to us.
But before we canted the Solemn Oath in front of our comrades to love our Motherland hotly, to live and learn and struggle as admonished by great Lenin, as we are being taught by the Communist Party… 

One week before the end of the academic year I fell ill. 
Mom thought it was cold and told me to stay in bed but could not bring the temperature down and when it rose to forty she called an ambulance from the Detachment Hospital because with two more degrees it's the lethal temperature. 
I was too lightheaded to be proud or frightened that a whole vehicle came after just me.
At the hospital, they at once diagnosed pneumonia and began to knock the temperature down with penicillin injections every half an hour. 
I did not care.
A day later the injections frequency was reduced to one per hour.
he next day two per hour.

The patients in the ward were all adults – soldiers from the Regiment.
Four days later I was quite Okay and walking in the garden around the Hospital when our class together with the teacher came to visit me and hand over the report card with my grades.
I felt uncomfortable and, for some reason, ashamed and ran away around the corner together with the boys of our class.
But then we returned and the girls together with the teacher presented me with the award for successful studies and exemplary behavior.
It was ‘The Russian Epic Tales’ which Grandma Martha read to me and to my sister and brother, but only quite new.

That way, little by little, things began somehow repeat themselves in my life…

In summer we again were taken to the pioneer camp to the same canteen, lining-ups, bedroom ward, ‘stiff hours’, and Parental Days.
Though some things had changed. 
As a full-fledged pioneer, I already belonged to the Third Platoon which, together with the First and Second ones, was eligible for swimming in the lake. 
But first, we had to wait a week and hope that it shouldn’t rain on the appointed day.
We waited impatiently and the weather on the swimming day was not rainy and we were taken in the trucks with a canvas top to the Sominsky lake. 

The road was going all through the forest along a clearing.
And it was very long too because we had sung all pioneer songs, and  ‘we marched to the ding of the cannonade...', and my favorite ‘ah, potato's so tasty-tasty-tasty-tasty...', and, well, all that we knew, anyway, but the road did not end and I felt sick with all those jolts on the bumps. 
Then those who sat at the square window cut in the front canvas shouted that something was seen ahead and the truck pulled up on a grassy shore of a big lake in the midst the forest.
They allowed us to enter the water not all together but in turn – one platoon after another.
The water was very dark and the bottom soft and sticky and they at once yelled from the shore:
‘Third platoon – out!’

At first, I only hopped standing in the water up to the chest.
But then they gave me a life ring and showed how to row with my hands and kick my legs for swimming.
Soon they became bored to command the platoon in and out of the water and everybody remained there as long as they wanted.
I let the air out of the life ring and checked that I could still swim for a couple of meters.
When at the end of the day they yelled everybody to get ashore because we were leaving I tarried a bit to make sure once again that the skill remained with me and gratefully uttered in my mind: 
‘Thank you, Sominsky!’

Next time they took us to the Lake of Glubotskoye.
The elder platoons said it was even better – there were a beach and sandy bottom. 
The road was much longer but asphalted and we were going by bus so I was not sick at all.
It was a huge lake indeed.
They said the lake had channels connecting it to other lakes where there were passenger boats and the big Ant Island.
The island was so big that there once was a monastery there and giant ant-heaps in the forest around it.
Whenever some monk was not behaving they tied him up and dropped onto some of the ant-heaps.
The ants thought it was an attack and defended their city so that in one day from the punished there remained only the bare bones of the gnawed skeleton.

But from the bathing place neither boats no islands were visible only a very distant opposite shore.
And the bottom really turned out to be sandy and pleasant to the touch of feet only you had to wade for a long time before reaching a place deep enough for swimming.
When wading back I deeply cut my feet near the big toe.
I bleed profusely and on the shore, they at once bandaged the wound. 
A dark spot wetted through the bandage but the blood leakage was stopped. 
They yell to everybody to be cautious and then one of the adults found a broken bottle in the sandy bottom and threw it further away in the direction of the opposite shore but it did not console me.
On the way back I even began to cry grieved by the fact that from the whole bus only my foot was cut.
One of the caretakers told me:
‘Shame! Are you a guy or a rug?’
And I stopped whining and in the subsequent life, I was ashamed to moan when it pained. 

Twice per shift, we were taken to the bath-house in the nearby village of Pistovo. 
The first time I missed – I went back to the platoon ward to collect the forgotten bar of soap and when I ran back to the canteen the buses had already left.
The camp became empty and quiet, there remained only the cooks at the canteen and me. 
You could do whatever you wanted and go wherever you wished even to the tents of the First Platoon with four iron beds on the unpainted floor-boards and the finely carved shadows of the nearby tree foliage dancing upon the canvas walls. 
But I, for some reason, climbed upon the booth without a roof but with an iron barrel on top of its plank walls. 
It was the shower for the caretakers and pioneer leaders.
They filled barrel with buckets of water for the sun to heat it.

All the two hours of solitude I spent atop that booth, wandering along the narrow beams supporting the barrel until the camp returned from Pistovo.
And I did not miss the second visit to the bath-house but I was disappointed – no baths at all!
You had to wash from a tin basin with tin ears for grabbing and carrying.
There were two taps side by side on the wall, one with boiling hot water the other with cold. 
Put your basin on a low table under them and fill it while the line of boys behind you with their empty basins in hands yell to be quick... 

The shift at the camp traditionally ended with the Farewell Bonfire.
It was built at the far end of the field with the rusty mast of never used attraction,  near the edge of the forest behind the barbed wire.
After the breakfast in the morning, the senior platoons marched to that forest through a temporarily made passage in the barbed wire fence and harvested dry firewood for the Farewell Bonfire. 
The harvesting went on also after the midday meal so by the evening in the field accumulated a heap of dry branches exceeding the height of a grown-up man. 

In the dusk of the nearing summer night that heap was set on fire from all sides and burnt with high flames under our choral songs and the marches from the accordionist.
The Director and the caretakers were arguing about something with agitated voices. 
In the end, the Director agreed and gave the orders to his chauffeur. 
The man answered:
‘You know better,’ and went to the camp buildings and came back by the Director’s car.
The chauffeur took a metal canister from the car trunk and the pioneers got the order to step back from the fire.
He splashed onto the fire from the canister and a huge ball of red-and-black flame with the buzzing sound swirled up in the night  – no less than for three meters and fell back again until the next splash.
Next morning the buses were taking us home...

However, the end of a camp shift did not mean the end of the summer. 
And again the Rechka river, games of ‘War-Mommy’, ‘Cossacks-and-robbers’, ’American’, and ‘Twelve Chips’.
And the new adventures borrowed from the Detachment Library.

However, in addition to visiting distant planets and mysterious islands at the opposite armrests of the sofa, I wandered in the forest too. 
The reasons could be quite different.
For instance, our neighbor Yura Zimin called to go picking the Hare Cabbage and I got curious about the cabbage I never saw. 
Well, it's sour but tasty only harvesting it is a real toil because of its too tiny leaves. 
Or my sister Natasha would share the news that in the swamp behind the next block there were myriads of blueberries! 
One boy brought home a whole milk-can of them!
And the spirit of competition drove me to the same swamp – I’d collect more than any ‘one boy’.

But usually I wandered alone and almost without any purpose; well, except for looking for a juniper worth of making another good bow, or collecting green pine cones for all sorts of hand-crafted toys. 
Stick four matches into a green cone and here you have the body of a quadruped. 
Add a vertical match to the body standing on all the four – it’s a neck; set onto it a smaller cone – wow! – you’ve got a horse!
Just don’t forget to attach a tail to it.

After green cones, you have to climb up young pine trees with smooth light brown bark that peels off too easily and smears your hands with the colorless sticky resin which in a few minutes will make your palms black but on your pants remains as whitish spots, also sticky though. 
The young pines are rocking with the wind and under your weight – class!
And their cones are so nice – green scales densely pressed to each other and as if lacquered.
The cones on the ground under old big pines are also old and black. 
Their scales are all apart and ruffled.
The big pines also have got green cones but those are at the tips of the branches where you cannot climb and which you cannot pull and bend because of they are too thick... 

New occupations spread like a prairie fire among boys. 
Some boy put his hand on a new trick and you hardly have time to blink your eye before all are already carried away by the production of explosives. 

Making a mine is easy.
You fill a glass bottle with water up to three-quarter then push inside a wisp of grass and pour bluish pieces of carbide on top.
(Carbide is stored in an iron barrel at the construction site of a five-story building across the road surrounding the Block.
Soldiers-blackstrappers would wink at your ladling handfuls of it into your pocket.)
Now seal the bottle with a cork carved from a wood chip, turn the bottle upside down and insert it into some pile of sand or soil.
Done.
It only remains to wait until the carbide after getting in contact with water in the bottle issues so much gas that its pressure will explode the bottle with a loud pop sending sand and glass splinters in all directions.
A word of warning.
Do not cut your fingers when carving the wood cork.
And when sitting on the ground and driving the cork into the charged bottle don’t keep the bottle between your thighs: it might crack cutting with its neck your thigh just where the shorts end as it was in my case.

Because of too much book-reading, I was lagging behind the flow of events in ever-changing public life. 
For instance, putting a book aside I spread it on the sofa with the covers upward and went out into the courtyard. 
What’s up?!
A caravan of differently aged boys were crossing it dragging pieces of boards, planks, and beams. 
I ran up to ask: what? How? Where?
They told me to run to the construction site of the five-story building where another group of boys collected construction materials which a blackstrapper soldier-guard generously allowed to lift.

I arrived just in time to grab the end of a long plank begged of the guard by elder boys.
The soldier only said to take it away quickly before anyone had seen.
We carried the pillage across the courtyard and down the Gorka and into the forest at the bottom of the steep slope of earth moved by the bulldozer when leveling the field for the skating rink.
There between the trees sounded hand-saws and hammers clapped in the full heat of eager labor.

The elder boys were sawing boards and nailing them to the pillars piled into the ground. 
With the trained eye of a Construction Modelling Designer I saw at once it was a shed without windows with the already hinged door and the ceiling of long planks.
There was a wooden ladder inside under the square hatch in the ceiling.
I climbed up and out onto the flat roof-ceiling.
A pair of big boys there were discussing whether the roof was strong enough and that the shed would be the headquarters of boys from our Block.
I asked for a chance to work with a handsaw or hammer but neither of them gave me it and they even commanded me to go down and not strain the roof with my weight.
I climbed down the ladder.
In the half-dark shed and around it remained no one of my peers and I went home to the book on the sofa. 
I was happy that the boys of our Block would have Headquarters of their own, like Timur and his team from the book by Gaidar.

Later, when wandering in the forest I always approached the shed but nobody was there and a big padlock hung on its door.
In the autumn next to the shed appeared a stack of hay and a team of chicken migrated to it through the square hen-way sawed out in the bottom of the door. 
The Headquarters was canceled.
