~~~ The Childhood ~~~

The first notch in my memory, the end of my legendary history and the start line of the life race is a recollection of a bright sunny morning where my Mom is taking me to the kindergarten.
We stop waiting for a crowd of people in black to pass by.
They shout cheerful greetings to me. 
I hold my Mom by the hand and squint in the bright sun and I am well-pleased that so many grown-up zeks (convicts) know me by name. 
I never realized then that zeks' amiable attention was caused by the presence of such a young and beautiful mother… 

The zeks were building two blocks of stone houses on the hill named the Gorka and when the first block was completed our large family was allotted a two-room apartment on the upper floor in a house of eight apartments. 
The Block comprised six two-story houses along the perimeter of a vast rectangular courtyard.
 
The entrances to all of the six houses faced the courtyard. 
The four cranked corner buildings had three entrances each while the two shorter houses put in the middle of the rectangular long sides – had only one.
The road of hard concrete running around the Block separated it from its twin block under construction by the zeks which mirrored ours in all the details.

When let out to play in the courtyard, I often crossed the road and went to the building site.
The zeks did not shoo me off and at their midday breaks, they shared with me their ‘balanda' soup. 

From the newly acquired expressions that started to embellish my speech my parents quickly figured out my current circle of communication and hurriedly entered me to the kindergarten.

When the second block on the Gorka was completed the zeks disappeared altogether and all the subsequent construction works at the Object (inside that ‘mailbox' they commonly used this name for it) was performed by the soldiers with black shoulder straps in their uniform – ‘blackstrappers'. 
Beside them, there also were ‘redstrapper' soldiers at the Object but as for their mission there I am not aware of till now. 

The Gorka, the highest part of the Object, shared its name with the two blocks built atop of it.
Across the concrete strip of the road around the Gorka blocks there grew the forest, on all the four. 

The way to the kindergarten began right behind our house. 
There was a straight long tilt towards the gate in the fence of the recruit depot barracks. 
Yet before reaching it, a wide path branched to the right into the pine forest. 
It bypassed the fenced barracks and a large black pond under big trees and went down through the thicket of young fir trees. 
The descent ended at the fence of planks midst the forest and in a wide clearing there stood a two-story house among the mesh of narrow paths and playgrounds with sandboxes and small teremok-huts made of wood.
There even stood a real nosy bus. 
It had no wheels to make it easy to step inside from the ground but the steering wheel and the seats were in place.

On the first floor, you had to take off your coat and shoes, leave them in your tall narrow locker with the picture of two cherries on the door and after changing into slippers you might climb the stairs to the second floor with big rooms for separate groups and the even bigger common dining room. 

My kindergarten life was made up of different feelings and sensations.

The feeling of victory on the day when the parents were already taking home their children and I, in response to my Mom’s prompting, discovered that I could tie my shoelaces with no help from anyone.

The bitterness of defeat on that morning when the same shoelaces turned to be pulled tight into wet intractable knots and my Mom had to untangle them distressed that she would be late for her work. 

In the kindergarten, you never know what awaits you there before Mom, or Dad or a neighbor will take you home. 
They can put a glistening tube on a thin rubber hose deep into your nostril and blow in a nasty tasting powder, or else make you drink a whole tablespoon of pesky fish oil. 
‘Come on! Do you know how good it is for health?!.’

The most horrible thing when they announce that it is the injection day today.
The children line up toward the table with a loud clinking iron box on it from where the nurse takes out the replaceable needles for her syringe.
The closer to the table the tighter you are squeezed with horror.
You envy the lucky ones for whom the procedure is already over and they go away from the table pressing a piece of cotton wool to their forearm happily boasting it has given no pain.
Not at all.
The children in the line whisper how good it is that today’s injection is not done under the shoulder blade. 
That’s the most fearful one.

Saturdays are the best.
In addition to usual dinner of hateful bean soup, they give you half a glass of sour cream sprinkled with sugar. 
And they do not send the children to the bed for a “quiet hour”.
Instead, they curtain the dining room windows with hanging dark blankets and they show filmstrips on the wall with white inscriptions under each picture. 
The caretaker reads the lines of the inscription and asks if everyone has reviewed everything in the picture before dragging in the next frame in the film where the seaman Zhelezniak will capture the armored train of the Whites, or a rusty nail will become a brand new one after passing a steel making furnace – depending on what filmstrip was fed into the projector.

I really enjoyed those Saturday sessions: the darkened room: thin rays of light from the slits in the tin side of the projector: the voice sounding from the darkness.
All that had a touch of some mystery.

Maybe, I rather liked the kindergarten than not, although at times I ran into hidden reefs. 

One day my Dad repaired an alarm clock at home and handing it back to my Mom he said,
‘Here you are – you owe me a bottle now.’
For some reason, I got delighted with those words and bragged about them in front of children in my kindergarten group and at the end of the day, the caretaker informed my Mom about that. 
On our way home my Mom said it's a shame and a boy should not share every family happening outside the home.  
Now, they might think that my Dad is an alcoholic. 
Was it what I wished? Eh? Is that so very nice? 
How I hated myself at that moment!

And it was in the kindergarten that I fell in love for the first time in my life.
However, I did my best to suppress the feeling.
With bitterness and sadness, I understood the impossibility of such a love because there was the insurmountable—like a bottomless abyss—difference in age between me and the swarthy girl with cherry-like eyes. 
She was two years younger.

And how unreachable and adult looked the former kindergarten children that visited it someday after the lessons in their first grade at school.
Giving airs themselves, in festive white aprons, they answered the eager questions of our group caretaker in such a reserved and dignified manner!

The caretakers and other workers at the kindergarten wore medical white coats but not all.
One day one of them sat me on a bench next to her to soothe my grief.
I do not remember what was that: a fresh scratch on my knee or a new bump on my forehead, but that her name was Zeena, that’s for certain.
A gentle palm stroked my head and I forgot to cry pressing my cheek and temple to her left breast. 
I closed my eyes in the warm sun and listened to the thuds of her heart under the green dress with the smell of summer until there came a call from the building,
‘Zeena!’

And at home, we had a grandmother now who came from Ryazan because my Mom started to go to work and there should be someone to look after Sasha and Natasha. 
Grandma Martha wore a cotton blouse over a straight skirt to the floor and a white blue dotted kerchief on her head.
She folded it into a big triangle and tied two of its corners under her round chin.

My Mom worked three shifts, she was a Watcher at the Pumping Station.
Dad had as many shifts at the Diesel Station. 
I did not know where it was but it should be somewhere in the forest because one day Dad brought a piece of bread wrapped in a newspaper and the snack had been given to him by a bunny!

‘I’m coming back home after the shift and here’s a bunny under a tree who says to me, ‘Here, take it to Sehryoza and Sasha, and Natasha.’
The bread from the bunny was much more delicious than the bread sliced by Mom for the dinner.

At times the working shifts of the parents did not coincide: one of them was at home, the other at work.

Once my Dad brought me to my Mom’s  workplace – a squat brick building with a dark green door behind which, just opposite the entrance, there was a small room with a small window up above a big old desk and two chairs.
But if you did not enter that room and turned to the left, you got into the incessant rumble of the murky hall with another desk at which Mom was sitting when at work.

She didn’t expect us and was surprised so very much.
Then she showed me the log where she had to write down the time and the figures from the round manometers to which there led narrow bridges of iron sheets all with handrails because under them there was dark water for the pumps to pump.
That was where that terrible noise came from.
To talk there we had to shout but not all the answers were heard.
‘What? What?’
So we returned to the room by the entrance.

Mom gave me a pencil and some old spare log from a drawer in the desk to do some hither-thither drawings.
Soon she asked me if I wanted to go to play in the yard.
I did not want to go out but Dad said if I didn't listen to Mom then he'd never-never bring me there anymore and I went out. 

The yard was just a piece of a pebble road grown over with the grass from the gate to the log shed a short way from the Pumping Station corner. 
And behind the Station building there rose a steep all in nettles. 

I returned to the green door from which a short concrete path led to a small white hut without any window and a padlock on its iron door. 
How to play in such a place?

Two rounded knolls stood on either side of the hut and were twice as tall as that.
Grasping long tufts of grass, I climbed the right one.

From that height, the roof of the hut and the roof of the Pumping Station became quite observable and in the opposite direction beyond the fence under the knoll there stretched a strip of bush and ran a bright river but I would certainly be punished if I went out of the gate. 
For doing anything at all there remained only the other knoll with a thin tree on its top.
I went down to the hut, bypassed it from behind and climbed up to the second knoll.

From up there, everything turned out to be the same as from the previous knoll, only that there you could touch the tree. 
Hot and sweaty after the climbing I lay down under it.

What’s that?!.
Something stung me in the thigh and then in the other; again and again.
I turned around and peered over my shoulder behind my back.
A swarm of red ants was busily bustling about my legs below the shorts of yellow corduroy. 
I smacked them away but the burning, unmerciful pain kept increasing.

Mom jumped out from behind the green door to my wailing and Dad after her too.
He ran up to me and carried me down on his hands.
The ants were brushed off, but the swollen, reddened thighs still burned unbearably.

And I learned that lesson for the rest of my life – the best remedy for the bites of those red beasts is to sit in the cool hem of a silk dress tightly stretched between your Mom's knees. 

The grandma Martha lived in the same room with us, her three grandchildren, where a narrow iron bed was placed for her.
The twins were laid to sleep on the sofa – a cumbersome structure with hinged cylinder armrests at its ends and a high leatherette back in a wooden frame.
Along the top of the back there ran a narrow shelf and above it, a long low mirror inserted in the board of the frame to reflect the small figurines of white elephants arranged along the shelf in a file, from the biggest one to the smallest. 

The elephants had long been lost and the shelf was empty and only when we played the train, having built it on the floor of stools put upside down and chairs on their backs, then, with the nightfall in the train car, I climbed onto the shelf although it's so narrow that allowed only to lie on your side. 

It’s more interesting to play the train when the neighbors' children – Lida and Yura Zimins crossed the landing and joined us in our room.
The train became even longer and we,  sitting in the turned over stool-cars, swung them with all might and main and they were tap-tapping on the floor and grandma Martha began to grumble at our raging like zealots. 

When the games and supper were over, my aluminum folding bed was set up in the middle of the room. 
Mom brought and unfolded the mattress on it and a blue oilcloth too under the sheet, in case I pee in sleep, a huge pillow and a warm blanket filled with cotton wool to make my bed. 

Grandma Martha turned off the radio box hanging on the wall by the door and switched off the light.
However, the darkness in the room was quite relative – the lights from the windows in the neighboring corner building and from the lampposts in the courtyard penetrated the mesh of tulle window curtains and under the door, there came a sliver of light from the corridor between the kitchen and the parents' bedroom. 
I watched the silhouette of grandma Martha as she stood by her bed and whispered something into the upper right corner of the room. 
Mom had explained to me that grandma Martha was praying to God that way but the parents could not allow her to hang an icon in that corner because Dad was a Party member. 

The hardest problem in the morning was finding the stockings.

Believe it or not, yet in those days even boys wore stockings.
A special belt with a pair of buttons in front was put on top of the underpants. 
Short rubber bands with fasteners on their ends were buttoned to the belt.
The fastener was a rubber button in a tight wire frame. 
The upper edge of the stocking was pulled over the rubber button and squeezed into the wire frame. Ugh!. 
And all that harness, of course, was put on me by Mom yet finding the stockings was my responsibility, and they always found some new place to hide. 

Mom keeps urging to come to the kitchen for breakfast; you, slow duck, be quick-quick; after all, she should be in time for her work.
But those meanies are nowhere to be seen. 
At last, I trace the nose of one of them sticking from under the hinged armrest of the sofa where the twins are still sleeping.
I need Mom's help to get them out without awakening Sasha. 

Tired of Mom's every morning tongue-lashing, I found an elegant solution to the problem of disappearing stockings and tied them to my ankles—one for each—after the light in the room was already switched off but the grandma Martha still talked in a whisper to her God. 
My brother and sister with their pillows on the opposite armrests of the sofa were as always kicking each other under their mutual blanket and did not notice anything in the dark.
I was in time to cover my legs with my blanket when Mom entered our room to kiss her children goodnight. 

And suddenly she did something she had never done before. 
Mom switched on the light living in the bulb inside the orange silk shade with hanging fringe of threads under the ceiling and threw the blanket off my legs discovering the stocking shackles around them.
‘Something had just pushed me to do it’, she told later to Dad with a laugh.
I had to untie the stockings and leave them on the bundle of my other clothes on the chair next to my folding bed notwithstanding all the cleverness and practical worth of my idea…

Perhaps, the most unpleasant part of the kindergarten life was the "quiet hour" – when you should go to your bed after the midday meal. 
Now, go and take off your clothes and put them on a small white stool and no matter how carefully you do it at getting up after the "quiet hour" the clothes will be in some kind of a mess or a stocking fastener will refuse to work.
And what’s the use of forced lying for a whole hour staring at the white ceiling or at the white window curtains or along the long row of cots with a narrow passage after each pair of them?

The children would lie silently in that row ending at the far white wall by which the caretaker sits with her book.
Occasionally some child would approach her asking in a whisper for the permission to go out to the toilet.
And she would in a whisper let him or her go and then in a hushed voice suppress the rustle of the whispering arisen along the cots rows:
‘Well, everybody shut your eyes and sleep!'

Probably, at times I really fell asleep during that "quiet hour", though more often I just froze in a numb drowsiness with my eyes open but not distinguishing the white ceiling from the white sheet drawn over my head. 

And suddenly the drowsiness was shaken off by a gentle touch of cautious fingers crawling from my knee over my thigh. 
I looked out from under the sheet.
Irochka Likhachova lay on the next cot with her eyes closed tightly but in between our sheets I made out a length of her outstretched arm.
Her fingers dived into my underpants and enclosed my flesh in a warm hand.
It was inexpressibly pleasant.
A little later her hand left my private parts – why? yet more!

Her hand found mine and pulled it under her sheet to put on something soft and yielding that had no name and that was not necessary at all and all I needed was that all that went on and on. 
But when I, tightly squinting, brought her hand back, under my sheet, it stayed there only briefly and again pulled mine over to under hers.

The caretaker announced the end of the 'quiet hour' and called to get up everybody.
The room filled with the hubbub of dressing children.

‘And we don't forget to make our beds', the caretaker kept repeating didactically walking to and fro when Irochka Likhachova suddenly shouted: 
‘And Ogoltsoff got into my panties!’
The children hushed expectantly. 
Sledgehammered with the disgraceful truth, I felt a hot wave of shame rolling up in me to splash out of my eyes with tears.
‘It's you who did it! Fool!' roared I and ran out of the room to the second-floor landing tiled with alternating squares of yellow and brown. 

I decided to never ever any more return to that group and that kindergarten.
No, never ever anymore. 
Enough is enough. 

But I didn't have time to think about how I would live further because I was distracted by the red fire extinguisher on the wall. 
Actually, it was not the fire extinguisher that caught my attention but the yellow square with a picture on its side where a man in a cap held exactly the same fire extinguisher, only upside down, directing an expanding gush from it to a fat bush of flames.
The picture, probably, served a kind of visual instruction for the right use of the fire extinguisher and the one in the man's hands was painted completely true to life, even the yellow square with the picture instruction was in place containing a little man in a tiny cap who fought, standing upside down, the fire with the spurt from his miniature fire extinguisher. 

And then it dawned on me that in the already unmake-outable picture on that miniature extinguisher the already indistinguishable man is back to the normal position – feet down.
But again, the next one, in the next picture, will be turned and—the most breathtaking discovery!—these diminishing men just could not end, they would only grow smaller to become unimaginably tiny specks and further beyond it without ever ending simply because this Fire Extinguisher hanged there on the wall of the staircase landing of the second floor, next to the white door to the senior group, opposite the hallway to the toilet.

And then I was awakened from the spell by being called to immediately go to the dining room where the kindergarten groups already were seated for the after quiet-hour tea.
Yet, ever since I was passing under the Fire Extinguisher–the bearer of innumerable worlds–with respectful understanding.

As to getting into someone else’s panties, that was my only and unique experience.
Enlightened by it, when in some “quiet hour” I had, with the undertone permission of the caretaker, to go out to pee, then I, passing along, knew the meaning of sheets overlapping the gap between two coupled cots and why so firmly Khromov closed his eyes laying next to Solntseva.

We lived on the second floor and the next to ours was the door of Morozovs, a couple of pensioners in the apartment of three rooms.
Opposite them, across the landing, there also was a three-room apartment where, beside the Zimins family, in one of the rooms lived single women, replacing each other, and sometimes couples of related women.
Between the Morozovs’ to the Zimins’ doors there stretched a dead wall with a vertical iron ladder fixed to it which led through the open hatchway to the attic under the slate roof, where the tenants were hanging their laundry and the father in the Savkins family—opposite our door—kept pigeons after changing into the blue sportswear.

From the door of the Savkins towards ours ran a wooden handrail supported by the iron uprights. 
It didn't cross the landing but turned down along the steps of the staircase of two flights to the first-floor landing and from there—four more steps down—to the entryway vestibule. 
The wide entrance door kept closed by means of a big iron spring opened to the vastness of the Block’s courtyard.
And the narrow door opposite it hid the steep steps into impenetrable darkness of the underground basement.

Founding on my subsequent life experience I may safely assume that we lived in Flat 5 though at that time I didn’t know it yet.
All I knew was that behind our door with a large homemade mailbox there would open the entrance hall with the narrow hallway closet  door to the left, and the glazed door to the parents’ room to the right where instead of a window there was the wide balcony door, also glazed in its upper part, facing the huge courtyard.

A long corridor led from the hall directly to the kitchen, past the blind doors to the bathroom and the toilet on the right, and in the left wall of the corridor, before reaching the kitchen, there was the door to the children’s room.
It had two windows, the left looked into the courtyard and the right presented the view of the wall and windows of the next house—the corner one.

The only window in the kitchen was also looking at the same neighboring building and in the kitchen wall to the right from the door, there was another window frame up under the ceiling, the small matte glass of the toilet window dark, of course, unless the light inside was on.

In the bathroom and in the hallway closet there were no windows but there were electric bulbs – just click the switch outside and walk safely in.

On entering the toilet, I, first of all, spat on the wall next to the throne and only then sat down to go potty and watch the spittle crawling slowly down the green coat of paint and marking its progress with a vertical track of moisture. 
If there was not enough saliva in the glob to reach the baseboard I would come to the rescue by additional spitting on the path – just above the stuck locomotive.
Sometimes the trip took from three to four spits and sometimes just one was quite enough.

The parents were perplexed with the spittle on the toilet walls until the day when Dad entered immediately after me and during the strict interrogation that followed I confessed that it’s me who was doing that, although I could not explain why.
After that, in fear of a punishment, I blotted the traces of the wrong-doing with the pieces of a cut-up newspaper from the cloth bag on the opposite wall but the thrill was gone. 

(… my son Ashot at the age of five sometimes leaked past the john – on the toilet wall.
More than once I explained to him that doing so was wrong and bad and they who missed should wipe up after themselves.
One day he balked and refused to wipe the paddle.
Then I grabbed him by the ear and led to the bathroom and ordered to pick up the floor cloth, led him back to the toilet and ordered in a rage choked voice to collect all the urine from the floor with that cloth.
He obeyed.
Of course, in more civilized countries a court decision might have deprived me of the parental rights for such a child abuse, however, in my opinion, I was right in that particular case.
No biological species is able to survive in their own waste.
I would understand him had he been spitting on the wall but in the toilet of the house that I built the walls were whitewashed and saliva wouldn’t crawl down the wall whitewashed with lime.
Later, the money for ceramic wall tiles was scraped up but the children had already become adults…)

You feel yourself kind of omnipotent when reconstructing the world of half a century ago—adjusting the details to your liking with no one to blame you in inconsistency.
However, you can’t fool yourself and I should admit that now—from a distance in fifty years—not everything is discernible with absolute accuracy.

For instance, I am far from certain that the pigeon enclosure in the attic was in some way connected with the officer Savkin.
It is quite possible that the structure belonged to Stepan Zimin, the father of Lida and Yura.
Or maybe there were two enclosures?
As a matter of fact, now I am not sure in the presence of pigeons in this or that enclosure on the day when I ventured to climb up the iron ladder towards something unknown, indistinguishable in the dusky square of the hatchway above my head.
It is possible that I just remembered the remark overheard in the conversation of my parents that Stepan's pigeons also suffered because of his booze binges. 

Only one thing remains undoubted – the tremulous ecstasy of discovery when, leaving behind my sister with her ominous predictions about my inescapable getting killed with the parental hand, and my brother watching my movements closely from the tiled landing far down there, I climbed into the new world unfolding before me under the slate roof.
A couple of days later Natasha came running into our room to proudly announce that Sasha had just climbed to the attic as well... 

So, it is quite possible that the pigeons in the attic were gone, but in the courtyard of the Block, there were lots of them. 

The courtyard itself was a rare masterpiece of a geometrically regulated layout.
Inside the big rectangular bounded by the six buildings, an ellipse of the road was inscribed with drenches on its both sides crossed with mighty, albeit short bridges opposite each of the fourteen entrances to the Block houses.
Two narrow concrete paths cut the ellipse into three parts at right angles to its longitudinal axis.
The resultant rectangular in between the paths and the road ditches was in its turn divided into three parts by an additional pair of concrete paths connecting the first two.
From the points of the four paths’ intersections the diagonal rays of four more concrete paths traversed the ellipse’s ends towards the central entrances in the corner buildings; and from that same intersection points came out the concrete arc paths described around two wooden round gazebos turning the courtyard into a model of perfect geometricity surpassing in that line any Versailles-like designs.

(… Nature is unable to compete with such a purified Bau Stile.
There are no circular circles among natural ones; neither absolutely isosceles triangles, nor flawless squares – someplace somehow the evenness would be ruined by the stubborn awl spiking through the backpack of Mother Nature…)

There were no trees in the yard.
Maybe later they were planted but in my memory, I find not even a seedling but only the turf cut into geometric figures by the concrete paths and, of course, the pigeon flocks flying from one end of the huge courtyard to the other at the call, 
‘Gooil-gooil-gooil-gooil-gooil-gooil-gooil!’

I liked these looking all so alike and at the same time so different birds, flocking around you, banging bread crumbles from the road on which you’d never see a vehicle; except for a slow truck, once in a blue moon, with the furniture of moving in or out tenants, or with the load of firewood for Titan boilers installed in the bathrooms of the apartments.

But even more, I liked feeding pigeons on the tin ledge out the kitchen window. 
Although for that you had to have a long wait until some of the birds would get it where from you call your ‘gooil-gooil' invitation and with the swish of the air being cut by the flapping wings hover over the gray tin of the ledge with scattered breadcrumbs and land on it with its naked legs to start to tap quickly on the tin with the offering. 

The pigeons seemed to have an eye on each other or had some kind of intercom system because the first one was followed by others flying in in twos and threes and whole flocks, maybe even from the next block. 
They covered the window ledge with the chaos of almost two layers of feathered backs and heads ducking and picking the crumbs, pushing each other, fluttering off and squeezing in back again.
And taking advantage of that pandemonium, you could cautiously put your hand out through the small window leaf in the kitchen window and touch from above one of their moving backs but cautiously so that they wouldn't dash off with the loud flapping of the wings and fly away… 

Besides pigeons, I also liked the holidays, especially the New Year. 
The Christmas tree was set in the parents’ room in front of the white curtain screening the balcony door.
The plywood boxes from postal parcels received long ago and now full of fragile shiny adoration came from the hallway closet: all kinds of fruits, gnomes, bells, grandfathers frosts, baskets, drill-bit-like purple icicles, balls with inlaid snowflakes on their opposite sides and plain balls but also beautiful, stars framed within thin glass tubes, fluffy rain-garlands from golden foil.

In addition, together with Mom, we made garland-chains of paper.
We painted it with watercolors, and when the paper dried we cut it into strips and with the glue of watered flour prepared colored links for long paper-chains.

Lastly, after decorating the tree with toys and sweets—because a candy with a thread through its motley wrapper is a nice (and edible!) decoration—a snowdrift of white cotton wool was put under the tree and there stood a foot-high Father Christmas on his plywood stand in the red cloth coat with the big staff and tightly sewn up bag over his shoulder. 

Oh! How could I forget the multicolored twinkling of tiny bulbs on thin wires?!
They came into the Christmas tree before anything else and the wires were connected to the heavy electric transformer hidden under the snowdrift – Dad made it himself.

And he also made the mask of Bear for the matinee in the kindergarten.
Mom explained how it should be done and Dad brought some special clay from his work.
Then on a sheet of plywood, he modeled the bear’s face with a stuck-up nose.
When the clay dried up, Dad covered it with layers of gauze and small newspaper pieces soaked in the water.
After a day or two the muzzle dried up and hardened, the clay was thrown away and—wow!—there was the mask made of papier-mache. 
The mask was painted with the brown watercolor and my Mom made me a suit of brown satin trousers with a jacket attached to them and you could get into the trousers only through the jacket.
That’s why at the matinee I was much happier that the woodcutters with the cardboard axes over their shoulders.

(...and until now to me, the watercolors  smell of the New Year, or maybe vice verse – it’s hard to decide, I’m not too good at moot points…)


And if the parents’ bed was brought from their room to ours that meant that in the evening there would be brought tables from the neighbors to their room and the guests would gather there.
The children of the neighbors would come to our room to play.
When it got late and the neighbors’ children all gone to their apartments I would venture to the parents’ room.
The room would be filled with noise and thin fog of tobacco smoke.
Everybody would try to speak louder than everybody else.
Old Morozov would announce that being a young man he once oared for seventeen kilometers to a date and someone would answer that he had to have known it was worth it and everyone would laugh out loud and start dancing to a disk on the gramophone brought by one of the guests.
Then they again would speak without listening to each other and Mom sitting at the table would begin to sing about the lights in the streets of the Saratov-City and her eyelids would fall halfway onto her eyes.
At that sight, I, mortified by the shame, would get on her knees and say, 
‘Mom, don’t sing, please, don’t!’
And she would laugh and say she did not drink anymore and would push the glass back but go on singing.

Then the guests would go to their apartments taking out the tables and still talking without listening.
I would be sent to our room where Sasha would be already sleeping but Natasha would not.
From the kitchen would come the tinkle of the dishes washed up by Grandma and Mom and then in our room the light would be turned on shortly for the parents' bed to be taken out… 

My Mom was also taking part in the Artistic Amateur Activities at the House of the Officers.
I knew that it was very far because a couple of times the parents took me there to the cinema to a great envy of Sasha and Natasha.
Before the movies, they always showed a short newsreel "The News of the Day" and one of them really frightened me with bulldozers in a fascist concentration camp that filled long trenches with corpses of naked people pushing them there with their blades. 
Mom told me to shut my eyes and not watch and after that, they didn't take me to the cinema anymore. 

But when at the House of the Officers there was a concert by  Artistic Amateur Activities Dad took me with him.
They sang from the scene with the accompaniment of the button accordion and the audience clapped.
One man talked for a long time and there again was clapping.
But I waited impatiently for the moment to see my Mom on the scene.
At last, when a lot of women in the same long skirts came to dance with a lot of men in high boots, Dad said, ‘Aha! Here is your dear Mommy!’
But I could not make her out – the women in the long skirts looked all so alike.
Dad had to point again and after that, I looked only at her so as not to lose. 
If not for such intent attention, maybe I would have missed the moment that for many years got stuck in me like a splinter that you can't pull out and it's better to avoid pressing the place where it sits.

The women dancers on the scene were spinning quicker and quicker, their long skirts were also turning and rising up to their knees, but the skirt on my Mom suddenly splashed higher and for a moment there flashed her legs seen to the very panties.
I felt unbearable shame.
For the rest of the concert, I kept looking only at the floor between the rows of chairs and on our way home I did not talk to anyone and did not answer why I was so pouted. 

(...in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet…)

And, really, what the point in those concerts at all if there was a brown shiny box of radio on the wall in our—children's—room?
When they broadcast Arkady Raikin you should turn the white knob of the volume control to make it louder and run and call everyone in the house to gather in our room to laugh all together under the box on the wall.
And you could hush the radio or even turn it off when there was a concert for the cello and the orchestra or if someone was telling what a good news was the news about the victory of revolution in Cuba which made him so happy that he turned out two daily tasks during one shift just for spite of the revenge-seekers and their leader Adenauer.

But May Day celebrating was not a home holiday at all.

First, you had to walk a long way by the road descending away past the Block’s corner building and then, down there, go on walking, on and on.
And there were so many people going the same way, both adults and children.
People greeted each other cheerfully and in their hands, they had balloons and thin twigs with leaves of green tissue paper attached to them with black threads, or red cloth with white letters between a pair of poles; and also portraits of different men, both bold and not too much so, on stubby sticks. 

Like almost all the children, I also had a small red flag in my hands, on a thin—like a pencil, only a bit longer—stick.
The yellow grated circle in the center of the flag depicted the globe with a yellow dove in flight above it and even higher a string of yellow letters reading: ‘Peace to the World!’
Of course, I couldn’t read at that time but those flags remained unchangeable for years upon years.

As we walked on, ahead of us there emerged music.
It sounded louder and louder and then we passed by the line of musicians with shining trumpets and past a red tall balcony with people on it in their peaked caps, but the balcony, for some reason, had no house to it… 

After one of the May Days, I felt like drawing a holiday. 
Grandma gave me a sheet of ruled paper and a pencil.
In the center of the sheet, I drew a large balloon on a string going down to the edge of the paper. 
It looked good – so festive.
But I wanted more than that, I wanted to have a holiday for all over the world.
So, to the right from the balloon, I drew a blind fence behind which there were not ours but Germans and other enemies from the newsreels in the House of the Officers, and all of them, of course, invisible because of the fence.
Well, Germans, let’s even you have a holiday!
And I drew another balloon on the string coming from behind the fence.
Lastly, to make it clear who is who and who is where I drew a cross on the enemy's balloon. 
For a minute I admired my art and then ran to share it, for a starter, with Grandma.

She couldn’t at first figure out what is what and I had to explain her the picture.
But when I got to the point that let even Germans have a holiday, we are not meanies, eh? – she stopped me at once to scold severely.
Did I not know, said she, that because of my those balloons with crosses the ‘black raven' vehicle would come and take my Dad away arrested, said she, and asked if that was what I wanted. 
I felt sorry for Dad and terrified by the prospect to be left without him.
I burst into tears and crushed the ill-fated drawing and then ran to the bathroom and thrust it behind the pig-iron door of the water boiler Titan where they lighted fire when heating water for the bathing...

The hardest thing in the morning was getting out of the bed.
You seemed to be ready to give anything if only they would allow to lie for another one minute or two and stop shouting it was time to go to the kindergarten.

And one morning the pillow was so yielding under my head and the mattress, spread over the folding bed, had become an exact mold of my body to such an extent that to tear myself away from them and from the heat accumulated overnight under the blanket was something unthinkable and unbearable.
I went on lying until there came a frightening irrefutable thought – if I would not tear me off that boggy drowsy bliss right now then I would never come to the kindergarten that morning and never come to anywhere at all because it would be death in sleep.
I climbed out into the cold room and began to dress…

On Sundays, it was possible to lie as long as you wanted but never again did the bed take such a pleasing shape. 

One Sunday I woke up alone in the room and heard Sasha-and-Natasha’s merry screams from somewhere outside.
I donned and hurried out into the corridor.  
No, not in the kitchen, where only Grandma was clinking the pots’ lids.
Aha! In the parents’ room!
I ran in there at the height of the fun – my brother and sister and Mom were laughing together at a white shapeless lump standing in the corner on their bare feet.
Of course, it’s Dad!
He had covered himself with the thick blanket from the parents’ bed and now awkwardly loomed there next to the cupboard.
But suddenly those legs started to jump together fluttering the white folds of that horrible bare-legged lump.
It cut Mom and the three of us clinging to her dressing gown off from the door to the corridor.
Oh, how we laughed! And clung to Mom more and more convulsively.
Then one of us passed over to crying and Mom said, ‘There-there, this is Dad, silly!’
But Sasha did not stop (or maybe Natasha but not me though my laughter was more and more transforming into hysterics) and Mom said. ‘Well, enough, Kolya!’
And the blanket straightened up revealing laughing Dad in his underpants and tank shirt and we all together began to console Sasha sitting high in Mom’s arms and incredulously trying to laugh through tears.

(..laughter and fear go hand in hand and there is nothing more frightening than the incomprehensible…)

And the next morning I went to the parents' room to admit that at night I again peed in the bed. 
They were already dressed and Dad said, ‘Gak! And that's a big boy!’
And Mom ordered me to peel off my underpants and get into their bed. 
She took from a shelf in the wardrobe dry underpants for me and went into the kitchen after Dad.

I lay under the blanket still warm with their warmth.
Even the sheet was so soft and gentle.
Full of pleasure I stretched out as much as I could – both legs and arms.
My right hand went under the pillow and pulled out an incomprehensible hardened rag.
I could not determine its purpose in the bed but I felt that I touched something shameful and shouldn't ask anyone about it…

It's hard to say what was more delicious – Mom's cookies or Grandma's buns both baked for holidays in the blue electric oven ‘Kharkov’.

Grandma Martha spent her days in the kitchen cooking and washing up and in the children's room looking after us.
She read us the book called ‘Russian Epic Tales' about hero warriors who fought the myriad hordes and the Dragon Gorynich and from time to time visited Prince Vladimir the Red Sun in the city of Kiev.

The three of us sat on Grandma's iron bed around her and listened to the exploits of Alesha Popovich and Dobrinya Nikitich.
When the heroes had their moments of sadness they remembered their mothers, each one his own, but they all addressed their different faraway mothers with the same reproach: that they'd better wrap them into a piece of white cloth while they still have been silly babies and throw them into the fast running River-Mommy.
Only Ilya of Murom and Warrior Svyatogor, who grew so mighty that even Mother the Earth could bear him no more and only mountain rocks still somehow withstood his movements, never raised that lamentation.

At times one or another of the hero warriors had a fight with one or another beauty disguised in armor. 
The outcome of such fights was different but the defeated would invariably say, ‘Do not kill me but treat with good food and drink and kiss on my mouth as sweet as sugar'.
Those epic places in the tales heard more than once I knew by heart and anticipated them in advance.

Grandma Martha called the bathroom ‘a bathhouse' and after a weekly bath, she was returning to our room steam-heated to red and half undressed in only one of her long skirts and in a man's tank shirt. 
She sat down on her iron bed to cool off while combing and braiding her gray hair into a pigtail.
On her left forearm, she had a large mole in the form of a female nipple, the so-called ‘bitch's udder'. 

After one of her after-bath proceedings when she seemed to notice nothing but the damp strands of her hair and the curved plastic comb and my brother-and-sister were playing on the sofa I sneaked under the iron net of the narrow Grandma’s bed sagging under her weight.
I turned over to my back and looked up – under her skirt between her straddled legs put wide and firmly on the floor.
Why? I did not know.
And I couldn’t make out anything in the dusk under the dark skirt.
I crawled away but for a long time later I had a feeling of guilt and a strong suspicion that she was aware of my maneuvers. 

Sasha was a reliable younger brother – taciturn and credulous.
He was born after the brisk Natasha, blueish because of the umbilical cord almost strangled him, but in a shirt.
The shirt was taken off from him in the maternity hospital, Mom said that they made some special medicine from newborns' shirts.

And Natasha turned out a real shrewd weasel.
She was the first to know all the news – that next day Grandma would bake buns, that new tenants would enter the flat on the first floor, and that on Saturday the parents would go someplace and that if you killed a frog it would bring a heavy rain about.

She had two pigtails starting at the sides of the back of her head.
The braids reaching her shoulders were intertwined with ribbons to tie a bow-knot.
Those bows never held in place crumbling into a knot and a pair of ribbon tails.
Probably from zealous turning her head on all the quarters to find out: what-where-when?

The two-year age difference gave me a tangible degree of authority in the eyes of the younger.
However, when Sasha taciturnly repeated my ascent to the attic, it seemed like by that feat he overtook me for two years.
Of course, neither he, nor I, nor Natasha was at that time able to make such formulations and conclusions.
We stayed at the level of emotional sensations and interjections like:
‘Oooh, boy!..’
or:
‘Oh-oh, boy!..’

Probably, the desire to reinforce me faltered authority and self-esteem, or maybe some other reasons—already forgotten—resulted in my getting nasty.
One evening, when the light in the room was already turned off but my brother-and-sister laid to sleep under one blanket with their heads on the opposite armrests of the leatherette sofa were still giggling and kicking each other, and Grandma Martha was standing over her bed whispering something into the corner under the ceiling, I suddenly spoke up from my folding bed:
‘Know what, Grandma? God is a jerk!’
She started to threaten me with the licking of a red-hot frying pan that was awaiting me in the future but I only laughed insolently and, encouraged by the reverent silence from the sofa with the little ones, kept repeating: 
‘Whatever! Your God is a jerk!’

The next morning Grandma Martha did not talk to me.
At the end of the day, I returned from the kindergarten and Natasha shared information that when Dad came home in the morning after the night shift Grandma told him everything and cried in the kitchen. 
And that at the moment the parents were gone to a party at someone's but I will get it and that’s for sure!
To my toadying attempts to start a dialogue, Grandma Martha gave no answer at all and soon went over to the kitchen. 

The front door slammed, the parents’ voices sounded in the hallway.
They moved to the kitchen and the talk invigorated.
Through the door of our room, it was not possible to make out what's going on. 
The voices sounded louder and louder until the door flew open with Dad’s hand.
‘What? Scoffing at elders? I’ll show you a ‘jerk’!’
His hands pulled the narrow black belt with a flashing rectangle of the buckle from his pants waist.

His arm swayed and never known pain scorched me.
Yet more. Yet more.
Wailing and wriggling I rolled under the Grandma’s bed to escape the belt.
Dad grasped the back of the bed and with one mighty jerk pulled it to the middle of the room.
The mattress with everything fell down under the wall.
I followed the bed to shelter under its shield of springy mesh. 
Dad pulled the bed back and forth whipping it on both sides, but I with inexplicable speed ran on all fours under the mesh jumping overhead and mingled my howling and wailing, ‘Daddy! Dear my! Don’t beat me! I won’t! Never again!’, into his, ‘Snotty sod!’
Mom and Grandma came running from the kitchen,
Mom screamed, ‘Kolya! Don’t!’ and stretched out her hand to catch the hissing impact of the belt.
Grandma too kvetched loudly and they took Dad out of the room.

Crestfallen, sobbing, I rubbed the sores looking away from the younger who silent and petrified huddled in the back of the sofa.

In the courtyard, we played ‘classlets'. 
First, you need a chalk to draw a big rectangular on the concrete path and divide it into four pairs of squares.
Then you must have ‘bitka' – a round flat shoe cream container filled with sand for stability. 
You throw bitka into one of the classlets and jump to it through others on one leg, pick the bitka up and jump on to the last classlet and out.
If your foot hasn’t touched any line on the way you may throw bitka into the next classlet and repeat the jumping tour.
After your bitka visited all of the classlets (from the first to the eighth) you mark one of them as your ‘home’ and further in the game you can behave in that classlet as at home – get on both feet and relax.
If your bitka remains on a line or if you step on a line with the jump then another player enters the game and you become a spectator.

There also were games with the ball.
For example, you should strike the ball against the ground with one hand pronouncing one word at each beat:
‘I! – know! – five! – girl! – names!’
At each of subsequent strikes at the ball, you had to name five random girl names yet without any doubling. 
Then were announced and pronounced five boy names,  five flowers, five animals, etc., etc., until the ball bounced out of reach or the player went astray in their enumerations.

Another ball game was not as much intellectual.
You just strike the ball against the faded pinkish plaster of the building (preferably closer to the corner and not to the window on the first floor).
Guessing the landing place of the re-bounced ball, you jump over it with your legs wide apart before it strikes the ground.
The player behind you should catch the ball after it had hit the ground and throw it back against the wall – this time for his jump and your catching.

There may be more players in the game though but then you have to wait for your turn in the line of the jumpers. 
I was enchanted by the infinity of the game.
It was like those endless pictures on the side of the Fire Extinguisher…

We also played outside the courtyard across the desolate road surrounding the two blocks.
Atop of the descend towards the Recruit Depot Barracks, there was a high fence with a wooden gate enclosing the garbage containers for all the Block. 
And next to the fence there stretched a level area covered with green grass except for a solitary pile of sand in it.

The sand game had no name.
You just scooped a handful of sand and threw it up and then caught it back into the palm.
Holding the catch, you had to pronounce:
‘So much  – for Lenin!’
Then the sand in the palm was thrown up and caught back for the second time.
Over the second catch the words to pronounce were:
‘So much – for Stalin!’
After the third throwing up no one cared to catch the sand, on the contrary, they hid their hands behind their backs and then even clapped the hands to shake anything clear off:
‘And so much – for Hitler! That’s it!’

It seemed to me not very fair – to leave for the last in the trinity not the tiniest speck of sand.
One day playing at the pile alone I broke the rules and caught a pinch of sand even for Hitler although I knew he was a very bad one… 

Besides, we made ‘secrets’ - scooping out small holes, no deeper than a teacup, and laying their bottoms with the heads of the flowers collected in the grass.
A shard of glass was put upon the petals of the heads.
The flowers looked even more beautiful through the glass that pinned them down.
Then the hole was earthed back again.
We made arrangements ‘to check our secret’ the following day but either forgot about it or it rained and then we could not find ‘the secret’ and made another.

One day the rain caught me in one of the round gazebos in the courtyard.
No, not the rain, it was a thunderstorm.
Black clouds piled up over the whole courtyard and at once it grew dark as if by night.
The adults and children who were in the gazebo ran along the paths to their houses.
Only I tarried over a forgotten book with pictures of three hunters as they wander through the mountain forests.
And then a waterfall rushed down out of the darkness above.
It was unthinkable to run home under it, I had to wait until it was over.

Thunder pearls erupted madly, the lightning cut the sky from the edge to the edge of the Block.
The gazebo bounced from deafening rumblings and water under the pressure of wind whipped almost to the center of the floor circle.
I laid the book on the bench along the leeward side but some crazy drops reached even there.
It was scary and wet and cold.

When the storm let up the clouds of darkness broke asunder and revealed the blue of the sky, it turned out that the day was far from over yet and my sister Natasha was running from our entranceway with an already unnecessary umbrella – Mom had sent her to call me home. 
‘We knew that you were here', she said panting, ‘You could be seen at the beginning...' 

(...not that I have some special flair for conspiracies but every time a confluence of circumstances leads me to where there is some secret collusion...)

When in the kindergarten three boys of the senior group began to exchange clandestine hints, something like:
‘So today, yes?’
‘We’ll definitely go, yes?’
‘After the kindergarten, yes?’
I felt unbearable bitterness that there had been planned some adventure for that day and it would pass by but I stay with the same as always every day.
I approached the leader of the three and asked directly:
‘Where are you going to?’
‘To steal tomatoes in the Where-Where Mountains.’
‘May I go too?’
‘Okay.’

I had already had a vague idea that stealing was bad but I had never seen mountains in all my life only the low hillock Bugorok near our Block overgrown with fir trees and facing with its sandy drop-off side the grassy football field in the level area by the enclosure with the garbage bins.
But first of all, I desired the wonderful tomatoes from the Where-Where Mountains. 
And I almost saw their red shiny sides.
So I could hardly wait for the hour when the adults come to take the children from the kindergarten to refuse to go home with someone else’s mother.  
No, thank you, with the boys I’d reach the Block sooner.

Four of us went out of the gate but we didn't take the short trail through the forest. 
Instead, we turned left to the wide dirt road on which there never was seen any vehicle. 
The road went uphill, then the descent began and I kept looking out around and asking the same question –  when would the Where-Where Mountains stand out? 
However, with the answers getting more and more curt and reluctant, I held back the question in fear of destroying my participation in the tomato adventure.

We went out to the road of concrete slabs whose junctions were filled with the black pitch.
I knew that road, it descended from the Gorka blocks to the House of Officers.
We did not follow the road but crossed it into the thicket of supple bushes and went along the path that led to a house of gray logs with a sign for those who could read.

The boys did not go any further. 
They started aimlessly wander between the bushes and the ashen gray log walls of the house until a man came out of the door and angrily drove us away.
Our leader told him that he had been sent by his parents to pick up the newspapers and mail but the man grew even more enraged and I went home well taught what going to the Where-Where Mountains meant.

But I still believed that adventures and travels would come my way and it’s the must to be ready for them.
That’s why, when a box of matches came up in the kitchen, I grabbed it without hesitation – you have to get trained, right?
A couple of initial attempts proved that lighting a match at its box side was so easy. 
And immediately there cropped up the desire to proudly demonstrate to someone my new skills.
Who to?
To Sasha and Natasha, sure thing, they would admire more than Grandma.
My authority by them required restoration after recent flops.

(...however, this list of motives is made by me in hindsight, from an unimaginably distant future—my current present over this here fire loaded with potatoes baking in it. 
But in that unimaginably distant past, I without any philosophizing and logical justifications perfectly knew that…) 

I should call the younger to some inconspicuous place and show them my command of the fire.
The most secluded place, of course, was in the parents’ room under their bed and we crawled there together.

At the sight of matches in my hands Natasha oh-ohed in a whisper. 
Sasha kept silence and closely watched the process.
The first match caught fire but went out too soon. 
The second developed a good flame and all of a sudden moved closer to the mesh tulle bed cover hanging down by the wall.
The narrow tip of the fire bent forward, the upturned icicle of yellow flame burst through the tulle, forming a black, ever-widening gap.
For some time I looked at what was happening before I guessed the meaning and shouted to my brother and sister:
'Fire! Run away! Fire!'
But those little fools stayed where they were and only boohooed in duet.
I got out from under the bed and ran across the landing to the Zimins’ where my Mom and Grandma were sitting in the kitchen of Polinna Zimin drinking tea with her.

On my skimble-skamble announcement of fire alarm, the three women rushed over the landing. 
I was the last to come to our apartment.
Under the ceiling of the hallway there lazily revolved wisps of yellowish smoke.
The bedroom door stood open and half-meter high flames of fire danced on the parents’ bed.

In the room there hung a thin blue mist and somewhere in it, the twins were howling. 
Grandma pulled the mattress and all down to the floor and stamped the fire with her slippers calling her God.
Mom yelled to Sasha and Natasha to get out from under the bed.
The fire jumped over onto the tulle curtain of the balcony door and Grandma pulled it down with her bare hands.
In the kitchen, Polinna Zimin rattled the saucepans in the sink filling them with water from the tap. 
Mom took the twins to the children’s room came back running and told me to go over there too.

We sat on the sofa silent, heeding the to-and-fro racing in the corridor, uninterrupted swish of water from the tap in the kitchen, the stray exclamations of the women. 
What now?
Then the noise little by little abated, the hallway door clicked behind departing Polinna Zimin. 
From the parents’ bedroom there came the sound of mop taps as during washing the floor; from the toilet room the sound of water poured down into the bowl.
And then the silence reigned – complete suspended silence.

The door opened. 
Mom stood there with a wide seaman’s belt in her hand.
‘Come here!’ she called without giving a name, but the three of us perfectly knew who had been called.
I stood up and went to get it.

We met in the middle of the room, under the silk shade from the ceiling. 
‘Don’t you ever dare, you piece of a scoundrel!’, she said and swayed the belt.
I cringed.
The slap fell on the shoulder. 
It was a slap, not a blow – no pain at all.
Mom turned and left.
I was astounded by the ease of punishment.
It's nothing compared to what I would get when Dad came home from work and saw the bandaged hands of Grandma after she had applied vegetable oil to them. 

When the door clicked in the hallway and Dad's voice said, 'What the… er... What happened here?', Mom quickly went there from the kitchen. 
All that she said was not heard but I clearly made out these words: 
‘I’ve already punished him, Kolya.’
Dad went into the parents’ bedroom to estimate the damage and a little later came to our room.
‘Ew, you!’ was all he told me.

The apartment smelled with smoke for a few days.
The runner from the parents' bedroom was cut up into smaller pieces of carpet.
The remnants of tulle and the burned bed were taken away to the garbage enclosure across the road.

A few years later, when I already knew how to read and was coming across matchboxes with the warning on their stickers, ‘Hide matches from children!’ I knew that that was about me too.


I do not know why but at that tender age I was quite sure that I would do something after which they would write books about me.
However, my cheeks burned with shame at the thought that the future writers about my childhood would have to admit – even being a school first-grader I sometimes wetted the bed at night, although Dad just couldn't hold back his exasperation because at my age he no longer peed in the bed. Never! 
Or that terrible occurrence when on the way from school my stomach tightened unbearably and I barely get home to the toilet room, but there everything stopped halfway, no matter how hard I tried to force it out, until Grandma terrified with my howling rushed from the kitchen to the toilet and snatching a piece of newspaper from the bag on the wall ripped the stubborn turd out.
Who could write such things in a book?!..

(...already in another—my present—life my current wife Satenic went to a fortune teller in the half-destroyed city of Shushi when our son Ashot fled the local army because of harassment from his company commander and regular beatings at the guardhouse.

In the year of Ashot's birth, the USSR was ripping apart at all seams; it seemed that a new life would begin and I cherished a hope that before he grew of age there would be no drafts – just contract enlistment to the army. 
Why not? ‘You never know the Devils’ next joke’, as the Russian saying runs.
Well, in my dream's case, the sonofabitch was not in the mood for joking. 

The commander of the company, nicknamed Chana, picked on Ashot because of his own dissatisfaction with the unfair arrangement of life – the Karabakh war combat friends of his had already become generals while he, Chana, was still rotting at the front line. 

Ashot was missing for eight days and at that point, Satenic went to Shushi and the fortune teller assured her that everything would be alright. 
And so it happened.
Ashot came home, we took him back to the place of his service to higher ranked commanders and he was transferred to another regiment, in a hotter spot, where he served the remaining year but already without the sergeant insignia in his shoulder straps.

So, in the course of seeing the future, the fortune teller shared additional information as a bonus, probably, that my Grandma in the other world was worrying about me and a candle should be lit for her. 
My Grandma's name (so the fortune teller) was almost like that of Maria, but slightly different. 

I was flabbergasted by the accuracy of the extrasensory guess. 
Maria and Martha are indeed very similar names of the two sisters from the Gospel.
Leo Taxil says that even Jesus himself sometimes confused them.

When my Grandma became ninety-eight, she also started to forget her own name. 
On such days she turned to her daughter for help:
‘Lyaksandra, I’m wondering lately – what’s but my name?'
Well, Aunt Alexandra was also a good one: 
‘Oy, Mom! But I don’t remember it too! Maybe, Anyuta?’
‘No … Somehow different it was...’
And three days later she would announce to her daughter;
‘I remembered! Martha, I am. Martha!’

No wonder the fortune teller couldn't give out the exact name. 

However, by this flashforward, I jumped ahead too much because it's me who had to serve in the army first but in this here letter to you, I'm still at the kindergarten senior group. 

I think I’d better turn off the tap with profound thoughts on infantile megalomania and return to the phase of the kindergarten completing formation of my personality…)

Now, back to the pivotal 1961.
What is remarkable about it (besides my graduating the senior group at the Object's kindergarten)? 
Well, firstly, no matter how you turn this figure around it will still be “1961”.
In addition, in April the radio on the wall of our room with the bell-like voice of Levitan announced that in an hour there would be an important government declaration.
Grandma started sighing and stealthily crossing herself.
Yet, when at the appointed time the whole family gathered in the children’s room, Levitan gleefully announced the first manned spaceflight by our countryman Yuri Gagarin who in 108 minutes flew about the globe and opened a new era in the history of mankind.

In Moscow and other large cities of the Soviet Union, people went to an unplanned demonstration directly from their workplaces in robes and overalls with handmade placards: 
‘We are the first! Hooray!' 
And at the Object in our children’s room under cheerful marches from the radio on the wall my Dad impatiently explained to Mom and Grandma:
‘Well, and what’s there not clear? They put him on a rocket and he flew around.’

Yuri Gagarin was being taken to Moscow by a special plane and on the way promoted from the lieutenant rank immediately to major.
So at the airport, he descended the airplane stairs with big stars in the shoulder straps of his light gray officer's greatcoat and marched with a precise parade step along the carpet runner from the plane to the government in raincoats and hats. 
The laces of his polished shoes got untied on the way and whipped the carpet runner at each step but he did not lose his demeanor and in general jubilation no one even noticed them.

(...many years later reviewing footage of a familiar newsreel, I suddenly noticed them and before that as, probably, all other viewers I could only see his face and the cool way he was marching in.
Did he notice?
I don’t know.
But all the same, he came very well and, holding his hand under the peak of his cap reported that the mission assigned by the Party and the Government had been fulfilled…) 

Standing under the wall radio at the Object, I had a too faint idea about flying around the globe sitting on a rocket, but if Dad said it’s so it had to be so.

A month or two later there was a monetary reform. 
Instead of being large and long pieces of paper, the money became much smaller, however, kopecks remained the same.
Adults often and loudly discussed the reform in the kitchen.
In an effort to join the world of grown-ups I once stood in the middle of the kitchen and proclaimed that new roubles were disgustingly yellow and Lenin in them did not look like Lenin at all but like some petty deuce. 

Dad threw a brief glance at the neighbors gathered in our kitchen and told me not to meddle in the conversation of the elders and to go to the children’s room.
I bore the offense silently. 
So, Grandma could say all that she wanted and I was not allowed?. 

At times I heard how my Mom praised me in her chit-chats with the neighbor women:
‘It happens, he asks questions that even I have no answers to!’
From those words, I felt proud tingling in my nose as after drinking some lemonade or fizzy water. 

(...may it be my megalomania took roots there?..)

But the setback in the new money discussion became a good lesson for me – no plagiarism from your grandmother, show off your own wits, if, of course, there are any.

And, by the by, about the nose.
In other people's homes, well, in the neighbors' apartments, for example, or separate houses, like that of Dad's friend Zatseppin, there always was some kind of a smell. 
Not necessarily unpleasant but it’s always there. 
And different to other places.
Only at our home, there was absolutely no smell whatsoever… 

In summer of that year, the adults took great interest in volleyball. 
After her work and home chores, my Mom put on her sportswear and went out to the volleyball grounds. 
It’s a stone’s throw away from our house, across the road, next to the Bugorok looking like a hill from Russian epic tales.

They played by the ‘knock out’ system and the teams were changing one another till the full night darkness condensed around the nearby lone bulb on the log post.
The players scolded each other for failures or hotly objected to the opposite team but they did not dare to argue with the umpire because he sat so high and had a whistle.

The on-lookers also changed.
They came and went, shouted along with the game, manned teams of their own, slapped themselves to kill a biting mosquito or paddled their buzzing scourges away with green broad-leaved branches.

And I was there and also fed the mosquitoes but they are a dim recollection yet I remember dearly a rare sense of community and belonging – it’s all us and we all were our own people.
It’s a pity that someone had to leave and go but there were others coming. 
Ours. We.

(...so long ago was all that. 
Before the TV and the Internet shoved us to separate cells…)

Closer to autumn Mom started to teach me reading the ABC book.
The book was full of pictures and the letters were strung with dashes designed to assist in forming the words. 
Yet the letters still wouldn't add up to something comprehensible. 
Sometimes I tried to cheat and, looking at the picture, read: 
‘Arr-hey-eye-enn. Rain!’
But Mom answered:
‘No cheating! It’s a ‘ c-l-o-u-d’.
I poohed and eeewed and had again to convert syllables into the words and in a few weeks, I could already sing through the texts at the end of the book where the harvester was reaping corn in the collective farm field… 

My Grandma was not in the least affected by the Yuri Gagarin’s statement for the journalists that while flying he saw no God up there.
She started a covert agitation and anti-atheistic propaganda among me.
She told me to mark well that God could do anything and knew everything and, most importantly, could do what you asked Him to.
And in exchange for what? 
For merely regular praying!
But then at school, I, with God's help, would have no problems. 
I wished a grade of ‘five' – I prayed for it – I got it. 
Some good trade, eh?
And I wavered. 
I succumbed to her agitation although I did not show it.
All the same, I became a believer.

However, no one ever taught me what a believer’s supposed to do. 
So I had to invent the rituals myself.
Going down to play in the courtyard, I dropped for a second behind the narrow basement door and there, in the darkness, said – not even in a whisper but in my mind: 
‘Alright, God, you know all yourself. See? I’m crossing me.’
And I put a sign of the cross somewhere about my navel.

However, when there remained just one week before school something balked inside me and I became an apostate.
I renounced Him.
And I did it out loud. Openly.
I went into the field by the garbage bins enclosure and shouted at the top of my lungs:
‘There’s no god!’

There was nobody around—not a single soul—but I took proper precautions, just in case if someone would hear accidentally, say, from behind the fence surrounding the garbage bins.
‘Aha!' they would think, 'Now that boy shouts there is no god – a clear-cut proof that before he thought there was.' 
And that’s a shame for a boy who in a day or two would become a schoolboy.
Therefore instead of the clear syllables of the blasphemous renunciation, I shouted indistinct vowels: 
‘Ou ou ouu!’
Nothing happened.
Once again with my face up, I repeated the cry and then in a way of putting the final period in my relations with God, I spat in the sky.
Neither thunder nor lightning followed only I felt the spittle landing as drizzle droplets on my cheeks.
So it was not a period but ellipsis points. 
Who cares?
And I went home liberated…

(...the microscopic spittle fallout sprinkling, in the aftermath of the godless spit in the sky, the face of seven-year-old me, proved up to the hilt my inability to draw conclusions from personal experience: a handful of sand when thrown up invariably came back down.
It also showed my complete ignorance of Sir Isaac Newton's conclusions in his law of the like matters. 
In short, it was really the high time for the young atheist to plop into the inevitable flow of the compulsory school education…)

The endlessly long summer at last pitied the little ignoramus and passed me to September when, dressed in a bluish suit with shiny tin buttons, with the wisp of hair above my forehead trimmed in the real hair salon for men, where Mom took me to the day before, squeezing in my right hand the stalks of the newspaper wrapped dahlias bunch, brought the previous evening from the small front garden of Dad's friend Zatseppin who had a black motorcycle with a sidecar  – I went for the first time to the first grade escorted by my Mom. 
I cannot remember whether she was holding my hand or I insisted that I was big enough to carry both the flowers and the dark brown brief-bag. 

We walked down the same road as to the kindergarten on which for a long time had already not seen the black columns of zeks.
That morning it was walked by other than me first-graders with their parents and by the elder, differently aged schoolchildren, separately or in groups. 
But down the descent, we did not turn to the wide trail to the kindergarten and went straight to the wide-open gate of the Recruit Depot Barracks. 
We crossed their yard and left it through the side gate and went along the path between the high trees of spruce and gray trunks of aspen up the hill.
From its top there again began a long descent through the deciduous forest, with a swamp on the right after which there was a short but steep climb to the road that entered the open gate of the school grounds behind the fence of planks.
Inside the closure, the road led to the concrete steps that rose to a narrow path in front of the entrance to the two-story school building, with rows of wide windows.

We did not enter the school and for some reason were standing for a long time and the big schoolchildren ran around and about and were yelled at.
Then we, the first-graders, were lined facing the school.
The parents remained behind but still there and we were standing with our flower bunches and brief-bags until they told us to form pairs and follow an elderly woman to the class.
And we awkwardly moved forward.
One girl burst into tears. 
They were comforting her and urging to walk on.

I looked back at my Mom.
She waved and smiled and said something I could hear no longer.
Black-haired, so young and beautiful…

At home, Mom told everyone that Seraphima Sergeevna Kasyanova was a very experienced teacher and it's very good I got to her class. 

Initially, the experienced teacher taught us to write in notebooks of ruled paper of horizontal and slanting lines. 
We were allowed to use only pencils.
We wrote endless lines of sticks and hooks from which later on to compose the letters with a nice slope if we kept to the slant.

It took an eternity before the teacher announced that we were to start writing with pens and should bring them next day to school together with unspillable ink-pots and replaceable nibs.

Those dip pens – graceful wooden pins in a bright monochrome color with cuffs of light tin on one end where the nib was inserted I had been bringing with me each day in a wooden pencil-box with the long sliding lid.
As for the plastic unspillable ink-pots, they really held the ink in between their double walls if accidentally overturned or deliberately put upside down. 
The pen’s nib was dipped in the ink-pot but not too deep because if you pick too much ink with the nib the ink would flow on the page – oops! – a splotch again…

One dip was enough for a couple of words and then – dip the nib again.
At school, there was only one ink-pot put on each desk for the pair of students sharing it to dip in turn their pen's nibs in. 

The tip of the replaceable nibs was bifurcated, however, the halves pressed tightly to each other were leaving a hair-thin line on the paper (if you didn’t forget to dip the pen’s nib into the ink-pot before).
And when you applied light pressure to the pen the nib’s halves smoothly parted leaving a wider line.
The alteration of thin and bold lines with the gradual transition from one to another imprinted in fine samples of the calligraphy textbook drove me into despair by their reachlessness.   

Later, already in the third grade, I mastered one more application of dip pen's nibs. 
If you stick the nib into the side of an apple, turn it over, and then pull it out the nib will hold a small cone of apple flesh and in the apple side, there is left a neat hole where you can insert the extracted cone after turning it the other way round. 
See? You’ve got an apple with a horn.
You may add more of such horns and the apple starts looking like a sea mine or a hedgehog – depending on the perseverance of the artisan.
Finally, you can eat your piece of art but I, personally, never liked the taste of the resultant apple mutant.

And with one more year at school, in the fourth grade, you learned the way of turning the dip pen's nib into a missile. 
First, break off one of the halves in the sharp end of the nib to turn it even sharper, then split the insertion end and jam a tiny paper tail-stabilizer in the crack to achieve a straight line flight.
Now, throw your dart into something wooden – the door, the blackboard, a window frame – the prickly nib’s half will pierce deep enough to stick out.

The road to school had become quite familiar but each time a little different.
Foliage fell, the droughts started blowing between the naked tree trunks and the school was peeping before you reach the descent by the swamp from near the big aspen with a wide trunk of the bright and smooth bark on which there stood an inscription cut out with a knife: 
‘It’s where the youtth is lost’.

(…until now the name of the youth literary magazine THE YOUTH seems to me too short in its spelling…)

Then the snow fell but a wide path to the school was trampled anew in the deep snowdrifts in the course of one day. 
The sun sparkled blindingly on both sides of that road to knowledge which turned into a snowy trench with orange marks of urine on its walls.
The next snowfall would completely bury them yet they popped up again in other places of the newly trampled and deeper trail through the forest.

Before the New Year, our class finished learning the primer and Seraphima Sergeevna brought us to the school library, a narrow room on the second floor. 
She said that from now on we might come there and borrow books for our personal reading at home.

I brought home my first book and fell on the sofa with it and stayed there, turning from a side to another, to my back, to my tummy, until it was read through.
It told a story about the city with its streets walked by the hammer-creatures who banged on heads of the small bell-creatures to make them ring.
Just so a story by Aksakov about a music-playing snuff-box...


Winter evenings are so hasty rides, you had barely had your meal and scribbled away your calligraphy home task when – look! – it’s already deep dusk outside the window.

Yet even the dark could not derail the social life and you put on your felt boots and warm pants on top of them, the winter coat and fur hat and – off you go to the Gorka! 

Is it far away? Not at all!
The Gorka was the name of not only the two blocks and the hill as a whole but also of that very tilt towards the Recruit Depot Barracks that we walked down on our way to school.
Being well-trodden the snow on the Gorka was ideal for riding a sled.
The descent started from the concrete road surrounding the blocks.
Its concrete, of course, was also covered with firm snow, but the lamplight from the posts along it confirmed – it’s still that same road.

One of those posts marked the top on the Gorka.
The cone of light from its lamp encircled the meeting place of the sled riding fans crowd.
Most of the sleds were store bought ones – with aluminum runners and motley seat beams.
Mine was made by Dad. 
It was shorter and made of steel and much speedier than the sleds from a store.

After a short run pushing the sled downwards with your hands on the backrest, you fall with your belly on it and fly downhill.
The bottom of the descent is drowning in the night darkness punctured by the distant light bulb over the gate of the Recruit Depot Barracks that jumps in time with the jerks of the sled under you.
The wind presses tears out of your eyes.

When the sled comes to a stop you collect the icy rope run through two holes in the sled’s nose and stomp up back.
The sled obediently runs after you pushing, now and then, the heels of your felt boots with its nose.
And with the approach of the roadside lamp, myriads of living sparks start to wink at you from the roadside snow-drifts changing their twinkle at each step. 
And on the top of the Gorka, they have already started to marshal a train of sleds hitching them to each other and – hup-ho! – off the general mass goes with the wild screams mixed with a frosty screech of the runners into the darkness. 

At some point I, maybe like thousands other boys—before me and after—did something that you shouldn’t do and we knew quite well that we shouldn’t, no,  but the sled’s nose in the light of the lamp shimmered with such a beautiful set of frosty sparks that we could not resist and licked it.
Sure thing, as expected, the tongue got stuck to the frost gripped metal and we had to rip it off back with the pain and shame and hope that no one noticed that such a big boy was so silly. 

Then you go home, dragging your sled along with stiff hands and throw it at the basement door in the entrance vestibule.
You come upstairs to the second floor and knock at your door with your felt boots and your Mom pulls off your mittens with a bead of ice on each hair of their wool disclosing the white icicles of your hands.
She runs out into the yard to scoop up a basin of snow and rubs your senseless hands with it and orders to keep them in the saucepan in the kitchen sink under the cold water running from the tap.
And life slowly begins to return to your hands.
You whine from the needles of piercing pain in the fingers and Mom yells at you:
‘Serves you right! You, rascal roamer! You, bitter woe of mine!’
And you whimper from unbearable pain in your stiff fingers and in your tongue skinned when tearing it off the frosty iron but you have no doubt anymore that everything will be fine because your Mom knows how to save you…

After the holidays Seraphime Sergeevna brought to the class an issue of The Pioneers’ Pravda newspaper and one whole lesson long read to us from it that Nikita Khrushchev had just made a promise that in twenty years the Communism would be built in our country.
When at home I joyfully announced that we were going to live in Communism where any item at the store would be free of charge, my parents exchanged glances but didn’t join my enthusiasm.
I no longer bothered them yet calculated in my mind that at the onset of Communism I’d be twenty-seven years of age, not too very old, so I’d have time to live in it.

By that time all the pupils of our class had already been admitted to Octoberists, with grown-up fifth-graders visiting us for the solemnity to pin an Octoberist badge on the school uniform to each of us.
It was a small scarlet star of five ends with a round frame in the center from where, as if from a medallion, looked out the angel-like face of Volodya Ulyanov in his early childhood when playing with his sister he commanded: 
‘March ahead from under the sofa!’
Then he grew up and became Vladimir Ilyich Lenin and they wrote lots of books about him… 

At home appeared a filmstrip projector – an awkward device with a set of lenses in its nose tube, and a box of small plastic barrels too, containing tight scrolls of dark filmstrips under their lids. 
Among the filmstrips, there was the old acquaintance about the hero of the Civil War, the seaman Zheleznyak, or about the little daughter of a revolutionary, who smartly hid the typesetting sorts brought by her father for printing underground leaflets into a jug of milk when the police raided their house.
They never thought of checking under the milk.

Sure enough, it was me who loaded the filmstrips and then rotated the black scroll wheel moving the projected frames. 
And I also read the inscriptions under the pictures but it was not for long because my sister and brother learned them by heart and retold before the frame would fully creak into the lighted rectangular on the wallpaper in our room.
The challenge to my seniority from Natasha did not feel so smarting as Sasha's disobedience. 

Just so recently as the two of us, rushed panting into the kitchen to still our thirst by water from the tap and he readily conceded to me the white tin mug with an imprint of the battleship Aurora on its side as to an older and stronger brother. 
And I, having drunk half of it, generously stretched the mug to him allowing to finish the water off – after all, that’s the way for strength transmitting.
Why was I so strong? 
Because I drank without prissiness a gulp or two from the bottle started by Sasha Nevelsky, the strongest boy in our class.
My younger brother naively listened to my naive claptrap and dutifully grabbed the outstretched mug…

He, like me, was over-credulous and one day at midday meal, when Dad took out from his soup plate a cartilage without meat and announced that who could gnaw it up would get a kilo of gingerbread from him, Sasha volunteered and, after all, gnawed and swallowed the cartilage but never got the promised gingerbread…

Mom brought home a parcel from the post office – a plywood box with brown sealing wax seals and large letters of the addresses: to our numbered mailbox from the city of Konotop.
Mom’s mother sent us a sizable piece of lard, a bag of black sunflower seeds and a hot-water bottle with moonshine gurgling in between its rubber sides.

When lightly fried in a frying pan the seeds tasted even more delicious.
We crushed them with our teeth, piling hulls away into a saucer and enjoying the sharp-nosed hearts.
And then Mom said if not to eat them at once, one after another, but collect, say, about half a glass of unhusked seeds and then sprinkle them with some sugar that would be a real thing. 

Each of us, the three children, received a glass for collecting the hearts.
Mom also equipped us with one saucer for all and a huge cornet which she deftly rolled of a newspaper and filled with the fried seeds.
We left the adults in the kitchen and went over to the children’s room.
There we lay down on the pieces of carpet runner with burn marks of a long-ago fire.

Of course, the dehulled hearts level in Natasha’s glass rose quicker than in ours, although she jabbered more than cracked.
But when Sasha began to overtake me also, my ego was hurt.
My lagging behind, in part, was the result of my distracted consideration of a cartoon on the newspaper cornet side where a pot-bellied colonialist flew off out from the continent of Africa with a black imprint of a boot kick in his shorts seat. 
I tried to husk faster, and I did not allow myself to eat any of the extracted hearts, yet I couldn’t catch up the younger in any way.
Then Mom came to the room with a glass of sugar and sprinkled a teaspoon of it over our achievements but I was already sick of them those seeds, sugar or no sugar, and in my following life I remained indifferent to sunflower seed snacks forever.

(...but still and yet, the luscious relishing the sunflower seeds is not only an effective pastime combined with a pleasure for the tongue and palate, it’s even an art.
To start with the lavish Slavonic style of the “piggy” type when the hollowed and even chewed in part black hulls are not spat out into the surrounding reality but pushed instead with the tongue out from the corner of the lips and keep sliding in a common half-chewed mass down the chin to finally fall off on the chest of the eater.
Or, quite contrary, the refined ‘filigree" style when a seed is thrown from the palm into the mouth at a distance no less than twenty-five centimeters. 
And so on to the chaste Transcaucasia manner, when the seeds for crushing are fed into the same mouths, one by one, from a fixed position between the thumb tip and the joint of the index finger so as to screen the intake of the seed, and the processed husk is not spat out but returned between the burka-like finger-screen contrivance to be scattered somewhere or put into something.
On the whole, the last of mentioned methods leaves an impression of the eater biting his thumb. 
‘Did you bite your thumb at me, Sir?!.'

Oh, yes, sunflower seeds are miles away from the dull popcorn.
However, that’s more than enough about them.
Back to the green cut-up carpet runner…)


It was on those runner pieces that my brother dealt a crushing blow to my authority of the eldest.
Coming home after a PE lesson, I unwary stated that doing one hundred squats at once was beyond human power. 
Sasha silently sniffled for a while and said – he would do.

The count was kept by Natasha and me.
After the thirtieth squat, I shouted that it was wrong and not fair because he was not rising in full, but Sasha did not heed and went on with squats and Natasha continued to keep the count. 
I shut up and soon after joined my sister in counting though after ‘eighty-one!' he could no longer rise even above his knees bent in the squat. 

I felt sorry for my brother over-strained with those incomplete squats. 
He staggered, tears welled up in his eyes, but the count was brought to a hundred and he barely hobbled to the sofa.
My authority collapsed like the colonialism in Africa. 
It’s good, I at least didn’t promise any gingerbread…

Where did the filmstrip projector come from?
Most likely it was a gift from the parents.
And in their room there appeared a radiola – the combination of a radio and records player.
Two in one, as they say now.
The lid on top and the side walls of the radiola gleamed with the soft gloss of brown varnish. 
Solid cardboard of the turned to the wall rear side had rows of small round portholes through which you could have a patchy view of the entrails with the white aluminum panels-houses, soft lights in the pearl-black turrets of the radio-lamps of different height and through one of the holes came out brown wire with the plug for a wall socket.

The front wall had a round green eye that lit up when you turned the radiola on.
This wall was covered with a special sound-friendly cloth through which you could trace the ovals of speakers.
Along the bottom, there was a low glass plate bordered with three knobs at its edges. 
Two on the right – the power switch with following volume adjustment (two in one), and the switch of the radio waves ranges; the knob on the left served for fine tuning to the radio wave.
The plate glass was black except for four transparent stripes from end to end, the stripes were snicked with fine notches with city names following them – Moscow, Bucharest, Warsaw.
Through those transparent strips in the glass, you could follow the progress of the red vertical slider on the other side of the plate, inside the radiola when twirling the knob of fine adjustment, 

The radio was not very interesting.
It hissed and cracked and swished along with the slider’s movements; sometimes there would float up a news reader’s voice in an unfamiliar Bucharestian language, a little further along the stripe it would be replaced with Russian repeating the news from the wall radio.

But lifting the lid on the radiola top opened the wide circle with a velvet red back to carry the record disks slipped onto the shining pin in the circle’s center.
Next to the circle, a slightly crooked poker of the white plastic adapter sat on its stand. 
The adapter should be lifted from its stand and lightly put down in the wide initial grooves of the wheeling disk which would start a song about Chico-Chico from Costa Rica, or about O, Mae Caro, or about a soldier marching in a field along the steep river bank. 

In the cabinet under the radiola there stood a lot of paper envelopes with black disks from the record factory in the Aprelev-city with its name printed on the round label in the disk center, below the title and the name of the singer and the instruction that the rotation speed was 78 rpm.

Near the adapter, there was the gearshift lever with notches for 33, 45, and 78 rpm. 
Disks of 33 rpm were smaller and turned slower than 78 rpm disks, but they—so small—had two songs on one side!
Natasha shared it with us that when you launch a 33 rpm disk at the speed of 45 rpm then even the Aleksandrov Soviet Army Choir began to sing with Lilliputian puppet voices.

Dad was not too keen on reading.
He read nothing but The Radio magazine with schematic drawings of capacitor-resistor-diodes, that was monthly brought to the mailbox on our apartment door.
And since Dad was a Party man, they also put there the daily Pravda and once a month The Agitator's Blocknote, a magazine with the hopelessly dense text of no more than one or two endless paragraphs per page, and no pictures at all.
And because of his Party membership Dad sometimes attended the Party Studies Evening School during the weeks when he worked the day shift. 
He went there after the work to write lessons in a thick copybook with leatherette covers because at the end of the academic year Dad had to pass a very difficult exam.

After one of the evening lessons, Dad brought home a couple of Party textbooks, which they distributed among the Party members learning at the Party Studies Evening School. 
But he never opened even those books.
And that, as it turned out, was his mistake.
Two years later in one of those books, he found his "stash" – a part of salary concealed from the wife for expenses at own discretion. 
He bitterly regretted and lamented over the find because it was in the money used before the monetary reform which made it funny papers... 

The Object in which we lived had more than one name and among them “the Zone”.
It remained from the times when the Object was built by zeks.
(Everybody knows that zeks live and work in “zones”.)
After two years of learning at the Party Studies Evening School, Dad and other learners were taken “out the Zone” – to the district center to have the examination.

Dad was obviously worried and kept repeating that he knew not a damn thing, although his thick copybook was written down almost to the very end.
And who cared, said he, be left for one more year at that Party Studies Evening School!

From "out the Zone" he returned in a very merry mood because they put him "three" and now all his evenings would be free. 
Mom asked him how he managed to pass the exam without knowing a damn thing.
Then Dad opened his thick copybook and showed his magic good luck charm: during the exam he made a pencil drawing of an ass with long ears and tail on the last page and  he wrote under it: ‘pull-me-through!" 
I did not know if it was worth believing Dad’s story because he was laughing all the way.
So I decided that I’d better not tell anyone about the ass that pulled my Dad from the Party Studies Evening School...

But Mom was a book reader.
She took them with her to her workplace to read them in her shifts at the Pumping Station.
The books were borrowed at the Detachment Library.
Yes, we lived not only in the Object-Zone-Mailbox but also in the Military Detachment number so and so.

The library wasn’t too far away just about one-kilometer walk.
First, down along the concrete road. 
At the end of the descent it was crossed by an asphalt road and after the crossroad, the concrete road turned into a street between two rows of wooden houses with small front gardens. 
The street ended at the House of Officers.
But about two hundred meters before reaching the House of Officers there was a turn to the right, to the one-story brick building of the Detachment Library.

Sometimes Mom took me with her there and while she was exchanging her books in the back of the building I waited in the wide front room empty of any furniture and with lots of posters on its walls.
The central poster presented the cross-sectional drawing of the atomic bomb (after we all lived in an Atomic Object). 
In addition to the posters with the bomb and atomic blast mushrooms, there were other pictures about the training of the NATO spies. 
In one of them, the spy jumping from behind on a sentry's back tore the soldier's lips with his fingers. 
That picture made me creepy but I could not look away and only thought to myself, O, how I wish Mom came out sooner with the borrowed books.

Once I pluck up the heart to ask Mom if I could also borrow books from the library.
She said that, actually, that was a library for adults but still led me to a room where a librarian woman was sitting at the desk with stacks of various thick books and my Mom told her that she did not know what to do about me and that I had already read the entire library they had at school. 
Since then I went to the Detachment's Library alone, without Mom.
Sometimes I even exchanged her books and brought home together with the two or three for me.
I kept mine scattered over the sofa and read them in a mixed way.

On one of the sofa's armrests I crawled across the front line together with the reconnaissance group Zvezda for the mission to capture a German officer, and,  rolling over to the other armrest continued to gallop with White Chief of Mayne Reid among the cacti of Mexican pampas.
And only The Legends and Myths of Ancient Greece in blue bindings I, for some reason, mostly read in the bathroom sitting on a low stool with my back to the Titan water boiler.
For such an irrational lifestyle Dad nicknamed me ‘Oblomov’, the lazybones whom he remembered from the lessons of Russian Literature at his village school…

That winter was very long.
The snowstorms gave way to the frost and the sun and some quieter snowfalls. 
Starting for school I left home at dusk as thick as the night dark.
But one day it was thawing and on my way back from school, already on the tilt between the Recruit Depot Barrack and the Block, I saw a strange dark strip to the left from the road.

I turned there and plowing the snow with my felt boots went to see what's up.
It turned out to be a strip of earth, that had come out from under the snow; a thawed patch of the ground sticky with moisture.
The next day the thawed opening extended and someone had left some black fallen fir cones in it.
And although in a day the frost hit again and covered the snow with the rind of ice and then the snowfalls set in anew and left no trace of the thaw on the hillside, I knew it for sure already, that the winter would pass... 

In mid-March, at the first lesson on Monday Seraphima Sergeevna told us to put our dip pens aside and listen to her. 
It turned out that two days before she went to the bathhouse together with her daughter and when back home she noticed that her purse had disappeared with all her teacher’s salary.
She was very upset together with her daughter who told her it’s impossible to built Communism with thieves around.
But the next day a man came to their house, a worker from the bathhouse, who had stumbled there on the purse and figured out who lost it the previous evening and brought it to her. 
And Seraphima Sergeevna said that Communism would be built and there was no doubt about it. 
And she asked us to remember the name of that working man.

(...but I have already forgotten it because "flabby gets the body, the memory gets blurred" as it stands in the dictionary by Vladimir Dahl…) 

The Saturday bathed in the sun as warm as the spring sun can be.
After school and the midday meal at home, I hurried outdoors in the courtyard where there was a general Subbotnik in progress. 
People came out of the houses into the bright shining day and shoveled the snow from the concrete paths about the whole huge courtyard.
Older children loaded the snow in big cardboard boxes and sledded it aside on a pile where it would not be in the way. 
In the ditches along the road, they dug deep channels cutting the snow with shovels and pulling out entire cubes of snow darkly wet at their bottoms. 
And through those channels, dark water ran lapping.
So came the spring and everything began changing every day…

And when they gave us at school the yellow sheets of our records with grades, the summer holidays started, bringing about the everyday games of Classlets, Hide-and-seek, and Knifelets. 

For the game of Knifelets, you need to choose a level area and draw a sizable circle on the ground. 
The circle is divided into sectors according to the number of players who, standing upright, throw a knife, in turn, into the ground of another player. 
If the hurled knife sticks in, the sector is divided with the line in the direction shown by the stuck knife's blade. 
The owner of the divided sector decides which part of it he wants to keep while the other part becomes a possession of the knife-thrower. 
When a player has not enough ground to stand upon at least with one foot he gets out of the game which goes on until there remains just one player.
You win!

(...quoting Alexander Pushkin:  
“tale’s a lie yet holds a hint
and a lesson too in it...”
Playing knifelets all I felt was an overwhelming wish to win. 
Now I cant' but feel surprise at how the  world history could have been mirrored in so simple a game for kids…)

And we also played Matches. 
It's a game just for two. 
Each player sticks their thumb off their fist and inserts a match, as a spacer, between the thumb tip and the middle joint of the index finger and holds it tight. 
The matches are slowly pressed against each other, the pressure grows and the player whose match withstands it without breaking becomes the winner.
The same idea as in tapping Easter eggs against each other only you don’t have to wait a whole year for the game.
That game had wasted more than one matchbox nicked from home. 

Or we just ran hither-thither playing a "warlet" and yelling "Hurray!', or "Ta-ta-ta!", or "I've killed you!" 
But the killed did not want to fall down and he shouted back:
‘Okay! I’m at death’s door!’
And still, for a long time, he went on running to-and-fro and ta-ta-taing before to slam, at last, that door behind himself and picturesquely fall in the grass. 

The war was waged with machine-guns sawed from plank pieces. 
Some of the boys played automatic weapons of black tin, bought from a store.
They were loaded with special ammunition: rolls of narrow paper strips with tiny sulfur globs planted in them.
The globs clapped loudly when the spring trigger struck them in the strip pulled automatically through the gun.

Mom bought me a tin pistol and a box of pistons: small paper circles with the same sulfur globs.
They had to be inserted individually for each shot.
After the report, a tiny wisp of sore smelling smoke rose from under the trigger. 

When I was playing the pistol in the pile of sand by the garbage enclosure, a boy from the corner house asked me to present the weapon to him and I readily gave it away.
After all, he was an officer's son and had more rights to it than me. 

Mom refused to believe that anybody could give away his gun to another boy, and so easily too.
She demanded the truth and telling that I had lost Mom’s present.
I kept repeating my truth so she even led me to the father of that boy in the corner house. 

The officer began to put his son to shame and my Mom said she was sorry and kept apologizing that she only wanted to check and make sure I did not lie. 

That summer the boys from our Block began to bring yellowish cartridges from the shooting range in the forest.
I so much wanted to see what it was like – the shooting range, but the boys explained that you might go there on special days only when there was no shooting.
On other days they would not let you.

A special day made us wait a long time, but it still came and we went through the forest. 
The shooting range turned out to be a huge opening with a wide pit dug in the sand.
We got there by a steep descent.
The far wall of the excavation was screened with a log wall all poked with bullets, bearing riddled paper squares of shot-through targets.
The cartridges had to be found in the sand underfoot.
They were of two types – longish, with narrowing end, for the AK assault-rifle and small smooth cylinders for the TT pistol. 
The finds were loudly welcomed and busily exchanged between the boys.
I had no luck at all and only envied them.

The screams of lucky seekers drowned in an eerie silence of the shooting range displeased with our trespassing the forbidden place.

At the other end of the glade, there was a trench cut like those at the front line. 
The shields of planks retained the sand of its walls.
A narrow track of iron rails ran over the field from end to end crossing the trench too.
A large plywood mock-up of the tank rumbled on its trolley along the track when pulled by the cables of a hand winch.
The boys started to play with all those things.

I also sat in the trench once, while the plywood tank rolled overhead, and then I went to the call from the edge of the field where they needed my help.
We pulled the steel cable dragging it to the horizontal pulley so that the boys on the other side of the battlefield could easily turn the winch handle that moved the trolley with the tank.

At some point, I got inattentive and didn’t take my hand off the cable in time.
The cable pulled my little finger into the pulley.
The pain in the crashed finger squeezed an agonizing scream out of me together with a fountain of tears.
The boys at the winch, hearing my "oy-oy-oy!" and the cry of the boys around me "Stop! Finger!", managed to stop the winch when there remained just two centimeters for my little finger to get out of the pulley on the other side. 
They started to turn the winch handle in the opposite direction, dragging my little finger to where it was originally swallowed by the steel cable. 

The unnaturally flattened, dead pale finger smeared with the blood from the broken skin, emerged from the pulley jaws.
It instantly puffed up.
The boys wrapped it with my handkerchief and told me to run home. Quick! 

And I ran through the forest feeling the painful beat of the pulse in the burning finger. 
At home, my Mom, without asking anything, told me to put the little finger in the gush of water from the kitchen tap.
She bent and straightened it several times and told me not to bellow like a cow.
Then she bandaged it into a tight white cocoon and said that by the wedding day it would be like new.

(...and at the same time, childhood is not a nursery of sadomasochism of the sort: "Oh, my finger was pinched! Oh, I hit my head!" 
It’s just that some jolts leave deeper notches in the memory.

And what a pity that the memory does not hold that admiring state of incessant discovery when a speck of sand stuck to the blade of the penknife contains innumerable worlds and galaxies, when every little thing, a scrap of trash, is the promise and pledge of the future wanderings and unbelievable adventures.

We grow up gaining the protective armor necessary in the adult world: me – the doctor’s robe, you – the traffic cop’s jacket.
Each of us is a necessary cog in the society machine.
All needless things—like looking into fire extinguishers or discerning faces in the frost gripped windowpane—are chopped off.

Now on my fingers, there are some old scars. 
This one from an awkwardly wielded knife, here it was cut with an ax; and only on my little fingers, I cannot find any trace from that pulley injury. 
'Blurred gets memory, body gets flabby'...

But, hey! I know some fresher sayings, like that recent one, and well-said too: ‘summer is a miniature life"...) 

When you are a child not only summer but each and every day is a miniature life.
In childhood time is slowed down – it does not fly, it does not flow, it does not even move until you push it.
Poor children would long ago have disappeared crossing this boundless desert of frozen time if they were not rescued by games.

And in that summer, if I got bored with a game, or there was not anyone to play with, I already had a place for refuge.
Sofa.
That’s where the real life is!
The life full of adventures of Belyaev, Gaidar, Jules Verne heroes. 

However, not only a sofa is a suitable place for adventures.
Once I spent a whole summer day on the balcony, outside the parents' room, reading a book about prehistoric people – Chung and Poma.

They had hair all over their bodies, like animals, and they lived in the trees. 
But an accidentally broken off branch helped to defend themselves from the tiger and they began to carry a stick with them and walk around.
Then there was a big fire and the Ice Age began.
Their tribe wandered in search of food teaching themselves to make fire and talk to each other.
In the last chapter, the old Poma could not walk anymore and fell behind the tribe. 
Her loyal Chung remained by her side – to freeze together in the snow. 
But their children went on. 
They had already grown up and were not so hairy as their parents, and they protected themselves from the cold with the skins of other animals.

The book was not very thick, but I read it all day long, while the sun, arisen on the left, behind the forest outside the Block, imperceptibly moved across the sky over it to the sunset behind the second block on the right. 

At some point, to get rest from the uninterrupted reading, I squeezed between the vertical iron bars under the balcony railings and started to promenade along the concrete cornices when outside them.

It’s not at all scary because I tightly grasped the bars, just like Chung and Poma when they were still living in the trees.
But some unfamiliar uncle was passing underneath and scolded me and told to get back on the balcony. 
He even threatened to tell my parents.
However, they were not at home and he complained to our neighbors. 
Then they told on me to Mom and she made me promise to never-never do so again…

(...every road, when you pass it for the first time, seems to be endlessly long because you cannot yet to measure the passed part of it against what is still ahead. 
With passing it, again and again, the road shortens. 

The same thing happens to the academic year at school.
But I would never discover it if I had left the race at the beginning of the second academic year…)

It was a clear autumn day and our class went on the excursion for collecting fallen leaves.
We were led not by Seraphima Sergeevna but by the School Pioneer Leader.
First, we walked through the forest, then went down to the road leading to the Detachment Library.
We didn’t follow it but turned into a short lane between the wooden houses.
It ended at a steep slope bridged with two wide streams of plank stairs down to a real football field ringed with a cinder path.
The stairs ended with a wooden platform, from which in both directions ran half a dozen bleachers of wooden beams.

Across the field, there were no bleachers at all but only a lone white hut and a huge picture, next to it, of two footballers in a high jump fighting for the ball with their feet. 

In winter they flooded the field with water and it turned a skating ring.
I vaguely recollected a dark winter evening with rare lamps on posts along the field’s perimeter; the bitterness of grief because they gave me so too brief a ride in a high skating chair with roundly curved blades of thin iron rods...

The girls of our class stayed back collecting the leaves between the bleachers and the boys bypassed the football field along the cinder path and fled down to the river running along the other side of it.
When I reached the river bank, three or four of the boys with their pants rolled up to the knees were already wading the hasty current of the river streaming through the gap in the broken dam.
Most classmates stayed on the bank.

I started at once pulling off my boots and socks and rolling my pants up too.
Entering the water was a little scary – what if it’s too cold?
But no, it wasn't, it was quite tolerable.

The noisy, splashing stream ran around the legs under the knees and the river bottom was surprisingly smooth and even.
One of the boys wading in the river shouted through the turbulent noise that it was a slab from the destroyed dam – wow! So classy!
We waded over it, to and fro, trying not to splash the upturned pants.

And suddenly all that: the splashes of the running river, the yells of classmates, and the clear gentle day, was cut off.

I found myself in a completely different, silent world filled only with an oppressive yellowish twilight and streams of whitish bubbles waltzing up past me.
Still not realizing what had happened I waved my hands or rather they did it on their own accord and soon I broke free to the surface where the river rambled loudly and whipped with splashes my cheeks and nose, and somebody yelled, ‘drowns!’
My hands flip-flapped at random on the water until they grabbed the end of someone’s belt thrown from the edge of the slab with its mean drop-off under the water.

I was dragged out, helped to squeeze the water out of my clothes and showed a wide trail bypassing the whole stadium so as not to ran into the Pioneer Leader and peachy girls collecting fallen leaves for their autumn herbariums…

In a bird’s-eye view, the school building should have been looking like a wide angular "U" with the entrance from outside the bottom line,  in the middle.
The tiles of the lobby floor were changed in the two corridors stretching to the perpendicular wings of the building with slippery yellow parquet.

In each of the corridors, a row of wide windows along one side presented the view of the space enclosed by the building where there was no court – just a thicket of young, thin-skinned pines. 
The corridor wall opposite the windows had rare white doors with numbers and letters of the classrooms.
The same layout continued after the turn into the left wing, and in the right one, there was the school gymnasium comprising the whole height of the two-story building. 
There also was a stage with a piano behind the curtain and heaps of seats complected in threes because at times the gym was turned into the assembly hall. 

The upper floor was climbed with the staircase marches from the left corridor turn and replicated the layout of the first floor.
Only the second floor was missing the lobby, of course, with its nickel-plated stand-hangers with hooks for the schoolchildren’s hats and coats behind a low barrier.
Instead, there stretched a long corridor with the frequent wide windows to the right and more rare doors to the left.

In winter, when you go to school not in shoes but in felt boots, it’s even possible to skid along the parquet flooring, unless, of course, you wear black rubber galoshes over your boots.
At first, my felt boots were sorely rubbing behind my knees, but Dad slashed them a bit with his shoemaker’s knife.
My Dad knew all and could do anything.

In winter you reached school still in the dark.
Sometimes I wandered around empty classrooms.
I peeped into the inner cavity of the small bust of Comrade Kirov on the windowsill in the seventh grade. 
It looked much alike to the inside of the porcelain dog statuette in the parents' room. 

Once, when I switched the light in the eighth, I saw a wax apple forgotten on the teacher’s desk.
I fully realized that it was not real yet the apple seemed so inviting and juicy and as if glowing with some inner light that I bit the hard unyielding wax, leaving dents from my teeth on its tasteless side.
I felt ashamed to be fooled by a bright fake.
Yet, who saw it?
I turned off the light and quietly went out into the corridor. 

(...twenty-five years later, in the school of the Karabakh village of Noraguoogh I saw exactly the same wax imitation, with the imprint of a child's bite and smiled knowingly – I saw you kid!..) 



Children of all nations and different age are much alike, take, for instance, their love of hide-and-seek…

That game we played not only in the courtyard but at home as well—we were three!—and sometimes with the participation of neighbor children from the same landing – the Zimins and the Savkins 
The apartment, of course, did not provide as good hiding places.
Well, under the parents’ bed, or then... behind the cupboard corner… er… O, yes! – the cloth wardrobe in the hallway.
My Dad made it himself.

A vertical two-meter high bar planted near the hallway corner, with two metal rods connecting its top to the walls, cut out a sizable parallelepiped of space.
It remained only to hung a cloth curtain on ringlets running along the horizontal rods and cover the whole contraption with a piece of plywood so that the dust did not collect inside.
Ready!
On the paint-coated wall inside the cloth wardrobe, there was fixed a wide board with pegs for hanging coats and other things.
The brown wicker chest stood under the hanger and there still remained a lot of room for the footwear.

Actually, there were not too many places for hiding but playing the game was interesting all the same.
You hide yourself in one of the mentioned places and, taming your breath, listen to cautious steps of the ‘it’ and then off you rush to be first at the sofa in the children’s room from where the 'it' had started their search, and attest your win by tap-tapping on the sofa and the loud shout, ‘Knock-knock! It’s for me!’, so as not to be the ‘it’ in the following game of Hide-and-seek.

But one day Sasha hid so that I couldn't find him. 
He just disappeared.
I even checked the bathroom and the hallway closet, although we had a standing deal to never hide there.
I felt through each of the coats on the hanger behind the cloth curtain in the hallway.
I opened the wardrobe in the parents' room with Mom's dresses and Dad's jackets hanging in the dark compartment behind the left door with the mirror. 
Just in case, I even checked behind the right door where there was no room for hiding because of the drawers with stacks of sheets and pillowcases and in the bottom one I once found the blue square of the seaman’s collar cut off a sailor’s shirt.
And under it there was a dagger of a naval officer with its yellow ribbed hilt and the long steel body, tapering to the needle-sharp point hidden in the black taut scabbard. 
Later, I tried to share the great secret with the younger ones, but Natasha casually replied that she knew about the dagger long ago and even had shown it to Sasha.

And now Natasha, giggling, followed my vain search and when I frantically cried out to my brother that, Okay, I agreed to be the ‘it’ one more game let him only go out from where he was now, Natasha yelled to him to sit tight and quiet and not give up.
I had run out of my patience and refused to play at all, but she suggested me to go out into the corridor for a couple of minutes.

On coming back I saw Sasha standing in the middle of the room pleased and silent and blinking bemusedly while Natasha told how he climbed the fourth drawer in the wardrobe and she piled the socks over him…

Sometimes there were exclusively family games at home with no neighbors taking part.

Hearing a lively laughing from the parents’ room I put the book aside on the sofa and hurried over there.
‘What are you doing here?’ asked I among the general mirth.
‘We check the pots!’
‘What’s that?’
‘Come and have a check!’
For the check, I had to sit on Dad’s back and grab him by the neck while he was firmly holding my legs.
I liked it but then he turned my back towards Mom and I felt her finger rooting my ass as deep as the pants let go.
‘The pot is leaky!’ announced Mom.
Everybody laughed and me too, although I felt somehow ashamed…

Another time Dad asked me,’Wanna see Moscow?’
‘Wow! Sure!’
He came from behind and put his hands tight on my ears, then squeezing my head in his hands he lifted me meter high from the floor.
‘How now? D'you, see Moscow?' 
‘Yes! Yes!’ screamed I.
He dropped me on the floor and I did my best not to show the tears from the smarting pain in the ears flattened against the skull. 
‘Aha! Got fooled! It’s so easy to fool you!’

(...much later I figured out that he was repeating the practical jokes played on him in his childhood…)

In the course of the Hide-and-seek with disappearing Sasha, when probing the clothes in the cloth wardrobe in the hallway, I noticed a lonely bottle of lemonade in the narrow cleft between the wall and the wicker chest.
I just adored the lemonade then,  the only reproachable quality of it was that the carbonated nectar kept disappearing from the glass so too fast. 
The bottle I found was obviously stored for some holiday and then forgotten about. 

I did not care to remind of it to anyone and the following day, or maybe the day after the following day, taking the opportunity of being home alone, I pulled the lemonade from behind the chest and hurried to the kitchen. 
Still, in the corridor my impatient hand discovered the slack of the metal lid on the bottle, I tore it off and flung the bottle up to my thirsty lips. 
By the middle of the second gulp, I realized that it was not that the lemonade was not somewhat not quit it but not it at all. 
Turning the bottle back in the normal position I saw that after the holiday it was filled with sunflower oil for storage.

That's good  that no one saw my try at drinking sunflower oil except for the small white box on the wall with red cross on its door, the hoard of first-aid kits, unknown pills and dark glass phials, between the cloth wardrobe and the hallway closet and also the black electric meter just above the entrance door. 
But they will not tell anyone…

The next gastronomical offense was filching of a newly baked bun which Mom took out from the electric oven “Kharkov” together with a bunch of others to spread them on a towel over the kitchen table.
Their brownish shining round backs were so tempting that I violated Mom’s order to wait a bit till the general tea party, and yanked one off into the lair on the wicker chest behind the cloth curtain.
Perhaps that bun was too hot indeed, or else the sense of guilt overwhelmed the taste sensations, but, hastily swallowing the forbidden fruit of the culinary art, I didn't feel the usual pleasure and only wanted the bun to be finished sooner. 
When from the kitchen sounded Mom’s call to all to came over for the tea with buns I did not want it, not in the least…

Well, in general, I was quite a law-abiding child; a not very dexterous slow-goer, yet diligent in earnest and if something went wrong it was not on purpose but simply so it turned out that way. 
Dad grumbled that my Sloth-Mommy was born a moment before me and all I was good for was lying on the sofa with a book day after day.
And Mom protested that reading was beneficial and I might become a doctor and look very elegant in a white robe.
I did not want to become a doctor, I never liked the smell in doctors' offices… 

At one of the lessons, Seraphima Sergeevna showed us a plywood frame 10 cm x 10 cm, a prototype of a loom with two rows of small nails on two opposite sides. 
A thick colored thread stretched back and forth from one nail to another on the opposite side,  formed the warp.
Multicolored threads of wool were interwoven through the warp turned a miniature motley rug. 
The teacher told us to bring such frames for the next lesson, our parents would certainly help us to make them.
However, Dad was not home, he worked the second shift that week and Mom was busy in the kitchen.
Yet she helped find a piece of plywood from an old parcel-box and allowed to take the saw from the hallway closet.

I worked in the bathroom pinning the plywood with my foot to the stool.
The saw got stuck too often, tore out small chips and scraps from the plywood but after a long tedious labor a crooked, zigzag sided square was sawed off.
And then I ran into the major problem – how to cut out a smaller square inside the ready one to make a frame of it?
I tried to hack the middle out with a kitchen knife and a hammer but only split the piece cut off with so many a hem! and an effort. 
By the time when I had to go to bed, the found plywood was spoiled in fruitless attempts and I realized that I was not fit to be a master.
The disappointment was so great that I raised a howl before Mom.

Lying in the folding bed I wanted to stay awake till my Dad was home after work.
I kept drowsing and waking and at some point heard Dad’s voice in the kitchen replying to my Mom angrily:
‘What? Again “Kolya”? What “Kolya”?’
And I fell asleep.

In the morning Mom said at breakfast: 
‘Look what Dad made for you to take to school.’
I got overwhelmed with happiness and delight, seeing the frame of a loom polished with sandpaper. 
Not a split, not a chip, not a crack anyplace.
And two rows of small nails in the lines straighter than a ruler...

The next year Dad brought from his work a jigsaw for me.
At school, I enrolled the group "The Skillful Hands". 
It did not go well with my jigsawing – the thin blades broke too often. 
Although I managed to make a frame of plywood (with Dad's help and polishing) for my Mom's photo. 

Doing pyrography was much easier and I liked the smell of charring wood.
Dad brought home a scorcher that he had constructed at his work and I produced a couple of illustrations to Krylov’s fables from The Book for Future Craftsmen.

All that does not mean that I spent my childhood in the realm of hand-made playthings.
I had a big Modeling Designer Kit bought from the store.
It was a cardboard box filled with sets of tin strips and panels with rows of round holes in them for threading small bolts and nuts to assemble details for construction of different things – a car, a locomotive, a windmill, a you-call-it.
It took about two months to accomplish a tower crane, taller than a stool it was, consuming all the pile of bolts and nuts in the kit.
I would finish it sooner but for Sasha’s insistent tries to take part in the construction too.

And the Robot costume for the New Year matinee about the Christmas Tree in the school gym was also made by my Dad.
Mom found the design of it in The Working Woman magazine which also each month was put into the mailbox on our entrance door.

The finished costume represented a box of a thin but sturdy one-layer cardboard.
The box was put on the shoulders and reached down to the crotch.
It was Robot's body ornamented on the chest with “+” on the left side and “-” on the right, just like on the large flat batteries for a pocket flashlight.
Inside the box, there also was a battery but more powerful, the Czech "Crown", and a small switch. 
Clicking it turned on and off the light-bulb nose in the cuboid-shaped Robot's head which was put upon mine like a helmet.
The square slits for the eyes on each side of the nose-bulb in the Robot's face allowed to see how and who with you were walking about the Christmas Tree…

At the Detachment Library, I asked (with fear and a timid hope) for the permission and was allowed (what a joy!) to choose my reading not just from the books recently returned and stacked on the librarian's desk but also from those on the shelves. 

To the right from librarian's desk there stood a wall of the Complete Collection of Works by V.I.Lenin in dense rows of volumes different only by the hue of blue in their covers, depending on the year of edition.
The opposite wall was paneled with multi-volumed rows of works by Marx and Engels in brown bindings and the wall by the door was hidden behind the tall ranks of Stalin's writings. 

Rows of thick, never opened books with the golden embossing of the letters and numbers on their spines, bearing convex relief portraits of the writers on their lid-like heavy front covers. 

But there was a cleft in the blue wall – the passage to that part of the Detachment Library, where, forming narrow passages, stood shelves with the books of varying degree of wear. 
The books by Russian writers were arranged in alphabetical order: Aseev, Belyaev, Bubentsoff…; others were ordered by the country names: American literature, Belgian literature...; or by the sections they belonged to – Economics, Geography, Politics…
There also were multi-volume collections: Jack London, Fenimore Cooper, Walter Scott (for all my efforts I never found among his works a novel about Robin Hood, but only about Rob Roy).

I loved wandering in the condensed silence of that maze of passages between the shelves, taking books off them, now and then, from as far above as allowed my height, to read the titles and put them back.
In the end, pressing the chosen couple to my chest, I returned to the librarian desk. 
Sometimes she put one of the books brought by me aside, saying it was too early for me to read. 

Once when I meandered the treasured labyrinth there happened an embarrassing thing – I farted.
The sound was not too loud yet, in case it had been heard at the librarian desk behind the wall of Marxism-Leninism classics, I tried to disguise my fault by imitations of wind-breaking produced with lips while still walking the narrow passages between the shelves.
Like, say, a thoughtless fancy of a boy for whom it was too early yet to read some books.
However, one of the camouflage farts turned out so successful, natural and rolling that I got really frustrated – the first, unintentional one she might haven't heard but the last was really unmissable.

(… as your mother’s mother would put it:
‘Kept fixing until mucked up.’
She liked to use Ukrainian proverbs in her speech…)

At the end of the winter holidays to the other subscriptions in the mailbox on our door was added The Pioneer Pravda. 
Sure enough, I was still an Octoberist but at school, they told us that we already had to subscribe to that newspaper and in any other way prepare ourselves to become pioneers in the future. 

Mom passed The Pioneer Pravda to me with the words: 
‘Wow! You've started already receiving newspapers!' 
I felt pleased to be admitted to the world of adults, at least at that point. 

And I was reading the newspaper all day long.
Every line printed in its four pages.

When my parents returned from work in the evening, I met them in the hallway to proudly report that I had read everything, everything, everything!.. 
They said, ‘Good job!’, then hung their coats behind the cloth curtain in the corner, and went over to the kitchen.
There's something unpleasant when for your pains you’re paid with a fond indifference.

Any hero having fought a life-and-death battle with Gorynich the Dragon to free a beautiful captive and getting from her afterward not the regular kiss of the sugar-sweet mouth but a fleeting ‘Good job!' would think twice before another combat whether the scrap was worth the while. 
It was the last time that I read The Pioneer Pravda entirely – from its red title with the statement of the printed organ affiliation down to (and including too) the editorial office telephone numbers and address in Moscow. 

The omission of the desired and deserved reward called for compensating justice restoration.
So, the following morning it was not difficult for me to persuade myself to wink at Mom's instructions that three spoonfuls of sugar were absolutely enough for one cup of tea. 
I was alone in the kitchen and while adding sugar to my tea I got distracted with considering the frost patterns in the kitchen window pane which was the reason why the count of the added spoonfuls started not from the first one. 
By an additional mistake, I measured sugar with a tablespoon instead of a teaspoon. 
The resulting cloy treacle was good only for pouring it into the sink.
And that became another lesson to me – filched pleasures are not as sweet as might have been expected.

The fact of having read The Pioneer Pravda issue so exhaustively inflated my self-confidence and at the next visit to the Detachment Library, I took from the French literature shelves a weighty volume with a bouquet of swords on the cover, The Three Musketeers by Dumas-peré. 
The librarian after a moment's hesitation wrote the book into my reader-form and I proudly took home the bulky booty.

I didn’t even think to read it on the sofa but took it to the kitchen and opened on the oilcloth-covered table.
The very first page full of notes who was who in the XVII century France looked like a rather complicated reading stuff. 
But then it started moving and by the scene of D'Artangan  parting with his parents, I figured out for myself the meaning of the abbreviated words "Mr." and "Mrs.", which never could be met in The Pioneer Pravda...

Later that winter, Mom decided that I needed to get my squint corrected, it was not right to leave it as it was. 
I never suspected I had anything of the sort.
She took me to an oculist at the Detachment Hospital and he peeped in my eyes through a narrow hole in the blindingly shining mirror circle that he wore on his white cap.
Then the nurse dropped some unpleasantly cold drops into my eyes and told me to come next time alone because I was already big enough to learn the way to their office. 

When going home after the next visit, I suddenly lost the sharpness of vision: the light of lamps on posts along the empty winter road turned into blurred yellow spots and when at home I opened a book the lines on the page were just unfocused strings. 
I got scared but Mom said it's Okay only I had to wear glasses so the following two years I had plastic-rimmed glasses. 

(…my eyes were straightened and made look at things at the same angle but the vision in the left one remained unfocused.
When being checked at the oculist’s I cannot see their pointer or finger directed at the check table.
However, as it turned out, you can live your life with only one working eye.
The squint was gone, however, the expression of my eyes doesn’t match.
It’s easy to notice on a photo when screening my eyes in turn: the inquiring interested look from the right eye gets changed with the deadly indifference in the left one.
I notice the same discrepancy in close-ups of some movie actors and think to myself if they also had been treated for a squint or maybe we all are spied on by other world unknown forces through their left eye…) 

And again the summer came but the volleyball was played no longer.
In the volleyball grounds under the Bugorok Knoll, they made two big concrete squares for playing gorodki game. 
They even organized a championship.
For two days the sticks of wooden bats clapped sharply at the concrete, sweeping the wooden pins of gorodki out of the squares towards the wall of the Bugorok sandy slope. 

The news reached me with a snail delay, yet I still witnessed the final – the single combat of the two masters who, even from the distant position, could knock out the most complicated of the gorodki figures—‘the letter’—with just three throws of their bats and didn’t spend more than one throw at such figures as ‘the cannon’ or ‘Anna-girl at the window’.

The tournament was over, the concrete squares were left and we, children, continued the game with fragments of the tin-cuffed bats and split gorodki pins. 
And when even the remnants got worn out of existence and the concrete squares lost in the high grass, the level grounds by the Bugorok side remained our favorite meeting place.
If going out to the courtyard you could see no one to play with then going over to the Bugork you'd find your playmates there.

And we not only played, we shared knowledge about the wide world around.
That the sticky grass ‘soldiers’ whose leaves looked like scales stuck to its stalk was edible and the sorrel too, but not the ‘horse sorrel’, of course.
And when you get a fresh scratch on your knee or elbow after a nasty fall just apply the underneath part of the Cart Track leaf. 

Or, say, the long-leaved green plants in a swamp, they are also edible only you have to peel the leaves off and get to the white core.
Here you are! Try it!

 We learned what kind of stones you had to strike against each other for sending forth a trickle of pale sparks.
One must be a flint and the other a turbid yellow one which after issuing the sparks had some strange, both attractive and disgusting, smell of seared chicken skin.
In games and communion, we learned the world and learned ourselves. 

‘Would we play Hide-and-seek?’
‘No go. Two is too few for the game.' 
‘There are two more. Coming back from the swamp in a minute.’
‘Went to the swamp? What for?’
‘Wanking.’
Soon the two boys came from the swamp giggling, each one with a whisker of grass in his hands.
I did not know what those bunches of grass were meant for neither had I any clear idea what ‘wanking’ was about.
By the grunts and giggles of boys at hearing the word, I could only guess that it's something bad and wrong. 

All my life I have been a champion of righteousness.
Everything should be as right as a rain.
Seeing something’s not right just puts my back up.
If, say, a grown-up piggy with brazen squeals sucks on a cow's udder, I'm tempted to disperse them. 
And look at the cow too! So resigned and obedient! 
As if she doesn’t know that milk is for calves and people only.

That’s why I stood akimbo and met the comers with the question:
‘So what? Got a wank?’
And then I found out that righteousness supporters sometimes better keep quiet.
And it's a crying shame that I could so easily be stretched on the ground in an unexpected brush. 

The football was played in the grassy field between the Bugorok and the garbage enclosure.
First, the teams' captains were determined by their age, height and the volume of their yells. 
Then the boys, in pairs, went aside and put heads together:
‘You’re 'hammer' and I’m 'tiger'. Okay?’
‘No! I’m 'rocket', you’re 'tiger'.’
With the placeholder nicknames agreed upon, they returned to the captains-to-be and asked the one whose turn it was to choose:
'Well, 'rocket' or 'tiger'?’
With the human resources divided, the game began.

How I wanted to become a captain!
And such a one that all the boys would want to get into my team.
But the dream remained just a dream.

I diligently ran in the grass: from one football goal to the other.
I was desperate to win.
I wanted so much...
It’s only that I could not get to the ball.
At times the ball rolled toward me, but before I got prepared to kick it the swarm of ‘ours’ and ‘theirs’ came racing around and send it far afield.
And again I ran across the field, back and forth, and yelled, ‘Pass! Me here!’, but no one listened to me and everybody else screamed also and ran and the game rolled on without, in fact, my participation...

In summer all of our family, except for Grandma Martha, went to Konotop, to the wedding of Mom’s sister Lyudmila and the region’s champion of weightlifting in the third weight class, young but rapidly balding Anatoly Arkhipenko from the city of Sumy, the center of the same-named region.
A truck with a canvas top took us through the Object's Checkpoint – the white gate in the barbed-wire fence surrounding the Zone, to the Valdai railway station where we boarded a local train to the Bologoye Station to change trains there.

The car was empty with no one but us on the wooden yellow benches between the green walls.
I liked the gentle sway in time with the clatter of wheels on rail joints beneath the floor. 
And I liked to look out of the big window watching the dark pillars of logs along the railway that kept running up and immediately falling behind; they carried the endlessly unrolling path of sagging wires on their crossbars.
At the halts, the train stood for a long time giving way to the faster and more important trains. 

One especially long stay was at the station of Dno.
I read the name in the glassed signboard on the green wall of planks of its shed.
And it was only when a single steam engine puff-puffed past the shed unhurriedly piercing with its long black body the curly white cloud of its steam that out train moved on.

(...I remembered that station and the long gleaming-black engine crawling through the white fog of the steam after I read that at the station of Dno, Colonel of the Russian Army Nikolay Romanov signed his renunciation of the royal throne. 
However, by that act, he didn’t save himself, nor his wife, nor the children of their royal family whom at the execution they were finishing off with the rifle bayonets.
I did not know all that sitting in the local train by the shabby shed.
And I also did not know that it does not matter whether I know it or not.
One way or the other, all that is part of me. 
It’s me…
Anyway, it's good that we don't know all in childhood...) 

Most of the houses along the Nezhin Street in the city of Konotop stood a bit back from the road, behind their fences which reflected the degree of prosperity of the owner and the main stages in the evolution of the fencing technology.

However, Number 19 briefly interrupted the line of miscellaneous fences on the left side of the street with its wall whitewashed ages ago. 
The wall had two windows and four wooden shutters to close the windows for the night.
The entrance to the house was from the yard after passing the narrow gate of planks.
To be more precise, they entered the house through four entrances – two doors in each of the two wooden verandas.

The first verandas from the street with its both doors, as well as the half of the whole house belonged then to Ignat Pilluta and his wife Pilutikha and it was their pair of windows overlooking the Nezhin Street.

The second veranda, hidden in a vine with wide green leaves and pale clusters of small never ripening berries, was divided in two by a blind partition lengthwise.
The part of the house, aka hutta, of our Grandma Katerina Ivanovna comprised the half-dark hallway-veranda, the kitchen with one window, facing the two stairs under the veranda entrance door, opposite the window there was a brick stove and the door to the one and only room of the hutta.
The room also had a window filled with the eternal twilight under the giant elm outside, shading the whole hutta and half of the Turkovs' yard, the neighbors at Number 17. 

And around the far corner in the second veranda, there was the last, fourth door to the hutta of the old man Duzenko and wife. 
They also had just a kitchen and a room but there were two windows more than in Grandma Katya's hutta because of the symmetry in the layout – the two windows looking to the street called for two windows looking to the yard. 

Under each of the Duzenkos' yard windows grew a huge American Maple with pointed tips in their open-palm leaves. 
Between the two maples old Duzenko kept one and a breast-high stack of red bricks, brittle with their age, for a possible restructuring of his hutta in future.

About six meters away from the maples and bricks and parallel to them, stretched a long shed of gray-black decrepit boards in its blind wall sectioned by the doors with padlocks.
Their respective owners kept there the fuel for the winter and in Grandma Katya's section lived a pig named Masha. 
Opposite the verandas with barren vine, one more elm and a plank-fence bordered the yard from the neighbors in Number 21. 

Under that elm there stood a separate shed plastered with the mixture of clay, cow dung, and chopped straw, the earth-cellar of the Pillutas was inside. 
The Duzenkos’ earth-cellar shed of bare planks stood deeper in the yard and as if continued the fuel sheds separated from them by the passage to the kitchen gardens.
In between those two earth-cellar sheds, there was a small lean-to structure covering the lid over Grandma Katya's earth-cellar – a two-meter deep vertical well-like pit with a wooden ladder going down into the dark between the narrow ground walls. 
At the bottom, the flashlight showed four caves-niches dug on all four sides, a little deeper than the pit bottom. 
That’s where they stored potatoes and carrots for the winter, and beets too because the frost couldn’t reach the vegetables at such depth.

In the corner formed by the Duzenko's and Grandma Katya's earth-cellar sheds there also was a kennel with a black-and-white dog Zhulka chained to his house. 
He tinkled the chain and whipped it against the ground, furiously barking at any stranger entering the yard.
But I made friends with him on the very first evening when, on Mom’s advice, I took out and dumped into his iron plate the leftovers after supper.


Grandma Katya’s hair was quite gray and a little wavy.
She had it cut to the middle of her neck and held with a plastic semi-circular comb beneath the back of her head. 
The color of her hair contrasted to the slightly swarthy skin of her face with a thin nose and a bit too round, as if frightened, eyes.
And in the dusky only room there on the blind wall hung a photographic portrait of a black-haired woman with an aristocratic hairdo and a necktie in the fashion of the late twenties New Economic Policy era – Grandma Katya in her young years. 
Next to her portrait, there was an equally big sized  photo of a man with a heavy Jack London’s chin in a Russian collar shirt and black jacket, that’s her husband Joseph when he was still working as the trade auditor before his exile to the North and subsequent disappearance with the Germans retreat from Konotop.

I liked the visit to Grandma Katya, although there were neither gorodki nor football playing but daily Hide-and-seek with the children from neighbor huttas who would never find you if you had hidden in Zhulka’s kennel.
In the evening rare yellow lamps lit up on the log pillars along the street without dispersing the night dark even beneath themselves. 
May beetles flew with a bomber buzz above the soft black dust of the road yet so low that you could knock them down with your jacket or a leafy branch.

We put the captives in empty matchboxes and they scratched the boxes from within with their long awkward legs.
The following day, we opened their cages to admire the fan-like mustaches and the glossy color of their backs.
And we tried to feed them with grass blades pieces but they did not seem hungry and we let them fly from our palms same way as ladybugs.
The beetle crawled ticklishly up the fingers, tossed its rigid forewings up to straighten the long transparent wings packed under that protective case and flew off with low buzzing. 
Okay, fly wherever you want – in the evening we’ll catch more...

One day from the far end of the street there came dissonant wails tangled with measured bumps.
To the sounds of the familiar cacophony, the Nezhin Street people went out of their yards and standing by their gates informed each other whose funeral it was.
In front of the procession, three men were marching slowly pressing to their lips the brass of unsteadily sobbing trumpets.
The fourth carried a drum in front of him like a huge potbelly.
After walking as long as was needed, he beat it on the side with a felted stick. 
The drum was fastened with a wide belt across the drummer’s back leaving his both hands free.
He held a copper plate in his left hand and from time to time clashed it against the other such plate screwed upon the drum rim and the trumpets responded with a new wave of disparate wailing.

After the musicians, they carried a large photo portrait of a sullen man and several wreaths with white lettered inscriptions on black ribbons. 
A medium platform truck followed the wreaths purring its engine.
On the platform with the unfastened sides stood an openwork monument of rebar coated with silver paint.
Two men grasped it from both sides and at their feet lay a coffin with the deceased.
A small nondescript crowd closed the slow procession.

I did not dare to go out into the street although there were Mom and Aunt Lyudmila standing at the gate and the neighbors with their children by their huttas. 
But still, driven by curiosity, I climbed the gate from inside to peep over it.
The lead-colored nose stuck from the pallid dead face looked so horrible that I fled back to the kennel of the black-and-white Zhulka who also was uneasily whining…

Grandma Katya knew the way of tying an ordinary handkerchief into a mouse with ears and a tail and, putting it on her palm scratched its head with a finger of her other hand.
Then the mouse made a sudden sharp jump trying to flee but Grandma Katya would catch it on the fly and put it back to lightly stroke on under our eager laughter. 
I realized that it was her who pushed the mouse but no matter how hard I try I could crack the puzzle of her doing that.

In the evening she took out a bucket of the sourly smelling slop of peelings and scraps to her section in the mutual shed where pig Masha was grunting impatiently. 
There Grandma Katya would stand over slurping Masha and scold her for some thing or another.

She showed us which vegetable beds and trees were hers so that we did not play around with the neighbors’ because there was no fencing in the gardens.
But the apples were not ripe yet and I climbed the tree of white mulberry though Grandma Katya warned that I was too heavy for such a young tree.
One day it indeed split under me in two.
I scared the punishment but Dad did not beat me.
He squeezed the halves of the split tree tightly together with some yellowish semi-transparent cable. 
And Grandma Katya did not reproach me but only blinked her eyes sadly.
In the evening she said that the pig hadn't eaten anything at all and knocked the bucket over and that animal was so clever and felt that next day they would slaughter her.

In the morning when the butcher came Grandma Katya left her hutta and already in her absence they were pulling frantically screaming Masha out of her section, chasing about the yard and slaughtering with a long knife to pierce the pig’s heart after which the screech changed to a prolonged wheeze.
Throughout that time Mom kept us, the children, in the hutta and she allowed me to go out only when they were scorching it with a blowtorch.

At Aunt Lyudmila’s wedding, sliced lard and fried cutlets, and chilled-out pork jelly stood on the table.
One of the guests volunteered to teach the bride how to stuff a home-made sausage but she refused and the guests laughed.

In general, I liked Konotop although I felt sorry for Masha and ashamed for the split mulberry tree.
For some reason, I even liked the taste of the corn bread.
Everyone was cursing it but still buying – there was no other bread because Nikita Khrushchev declared the corn to be the queen of the fields.

We were returning to the Object also by train.
I felt sick and dizzy but eventually, there was found a window in the car where you could stick your head out. 
And I watched as the green chain of our train cars bent into a long arc rolled around the green field.
It seemed to me that our travel did not end because the train ran along the same huge circle in the middle of the field with groves here and there. 
At some of the stops, Dad left the car and did not come back at the departure. 
I was scared that we would remain without our Dad and started to whine pitifully.
But a few minutes later he appeared along the car aisle carrying ice cream because of which he lingered on the platform and jumped into another car of the departing train…

That year my younger sister and brother also went to school and at the end of August, my Dad with an angrily reddened face took Grandma Martha to Bologoye to help her change trains to Ryazan. 
When saying 'goodbye', she sobbed a little and Dad said: 
‘Again? Started again!’
Then she kissed all the three of her grandkids and was gone from my life…

Across the road opposite the corner buildings of our Block, there was a grocery store and, after Grandma Martha had left, my Mom was sending me there for small purchases: bread, matches, salt or vegetable oil. 
More important products she bought herself: meat, potatoes, sore cream or chocolate butter.
For holidays large beads of red or small beads of black caviar were bought.
The Object was well catered for.
And only ice cream was brought to the store once a month and immediately sold out. 
As for the tasty corn bread, I never saw it in that store.

To the right of the store, near the turn of the road surrounding the Block, the wall of the forest was slightly cleft by a narrow glade.
The car repair ramp made of sturdy logs provided another gathering place for children to play.

‘Let’s run!’ called a familiar boy to me. ‘They’ve caught a hedgehog!’
I saw the hedgehog only in pictures and hurried to the scream-and-shouting group of boys.
With the sticks in their hands they blocked the way for the animal to flee to the forest and when the hedgehog folded into a defensive gray-brown ball of needles they rolled it with the same sticks into a small brook.
In the water, the hedgehog unfolded, stuck his sharp muzzle with the black blob of the nose out from under the needles and tried to escape through the grass on his short crooked legs. 
He was again spread on the ground.
 A stick pressed across his belly did not allow him to curl up again.
‘Look!’ shouted one of the boys. ‘He’s constipated! Cannot shit!’
To prove the statement, the boy poked a stalk of some rank grass into a dark bulge between the animal’s hind legs.
‘The turd is too hard. He needs help.’
I recollected how Grandma Martha had saved me.

Someone in the company had pliers. 
The animal was crucified on the earth with a few additional sticks and the self-proclaimed vet pulled the jammed turd with the pliers.
The turd, however, was not ending and turned out to be a bluish-white color.
‘You fool! You tore his guts out!’ cried another boy.
The hedgehog was set free and once again made for the forest dragging the pulled out part of the intestine behind.
All followed to check what would happen next.

I didn’t want to see any more of that and was rescued by my sister Natasha who came running from the Block to say that Mom was calling me.
I immediately left the party of boys and returned with her to the courtyard.
There I talked to Mom, to some neighbors, did something and all the time was thinking  one and the same thought formulated in a clear-cut, not childish way:
‘How can I go on living after what I’ve seen? How to live with it?’

(...but still and yet, I survived. 
The blessing property of human memory, its forgetfulness recorded by Vladimir Dahl in his dictionary, saved me.
However, in a series of examples of the savage brutality of men, turning even their likes into deformed pieces of meat, that hedgehog comes the first, dragging through the dry grass a grayish damp part of its rectum with small pieces of dry earth stuck to it. 
And I live to understand that low brutes need high-flying excuses for their barbarity: 
...to alleviate sufferings…
...as a sacred revenge…
...for the sake of race cleansing…

However, to be entirely frank: is there any guarantee that I myself under no circumstances would do anything of the sort?
I don’t know…)

When you are a child there is no time to look back at all those series in your memory. 
You have to go on—further and beyond—to new discoveries. 
If only you’ve got the nerve to keep the course.

Once, after a slight deviation to the left from the usual ‘school – home’ route, I went deeper into the deciduous part of the forest.
On a gently rising hillock, I went across four trees that grew a couple of meters apart from each other in the corners of an almost regular square. 
Smooth wide trunks without branches stretched upwards where at the height of six to seven meters there was a platform. 
The crossbeams from the stumps of thick boughs nailed to one of the trees formed the ladder to the platform.
Who did that and what for?
I don’t know. All I know is that I didn’t have it in me to climb that desolate platform discovered in the forest.

Much easier went on the discovery of the basement world.
I ascended there with my Dad to bring the firewood for Titan the Boiler to heat water for bathing.
The bulbs down there were missing and Dad took with us a flashlight with a spring lever protruding from the handle.
When you squeezed the flashlight in your hand the lever hid into the handle; you loosened the grip and the lever popped out again.
Squeeze and loosen, squeeze and loosen and inside the handle there starts the buzz of the awaken dynamo-machine producing the current for the flash lamp.
The faster you rotate the buzzing dynamo the brighter is the light from the lamp.

A circle of light hopped along the walls and cemented floor in the left corridor of the basement at the end of which was our section.
The walls in the narrow corridor were made of boards as well as the sections’ doors with hanging padlocks.
Behind our door, there was a square room with two concrete walls and the wooden partition from the neighboring section. 
Dad unlocked the padlock and turned on the bulb in our section.
The bright light showed a high stock of evenly sawed logs of wood against the wall opposite the door, and all sorts of household things hanging from the walls or piled on shelves: the sled, the tools, the skies. 
After a pair of logs was chopped with the ax I collected the chips for kindling Titan the Boiler and a pair of thicker wood pieces and Dad grabbed a whole armful. 

Sometimes Dad was tinkering with something or sawing logs in our basement section and I, bored by waiting, would go out in the corridor with a narrow barred ditch along the cemented floor.
Through the open door, the bulb threw a clear rectangle of light on the opposite section wall while the far end of the corridor from where we had come was lost in the dark. 
But I was not afraid of anything because behind my back my Dad was working in his old black sailor’s pea jacket with two rows of copper buttons with embossed anchors...

The firewood got to the basement in early autumn.
In the center of the side wall of our house, there was a cemented pit under a lid made of sheet metal. 
Slightly above the pit's bottom, an opening of 50 cm x 50 cm led through the foundation into the basement corridor at about a meter and a half above its cemented floor. 
Near that pit, a truck would dump a pile of ruffly chopped logs which were to be dropped into the pit and then through the opening into the basement and further taken to the section of whom the firewood was brought for. 

As I was already a big boy, Dad instructed me to throw the wood pieces into the pit so that he could drag them through the opening down to the basement. 
I could not see him but heard his voice from down there when he shouted me to stop if the pile of logs in the pit threatened with a gridlock in the opening.
Then there came muffled knocking as the logs fell on the cemented floor of the corridor.

Everything went quite well until Natasha told Sasha that they had brought the firewood for us and I was helping Dad to move the logs to the basement.
Shasha came running and began to drag the logs from the pile and drop them to the pit.
To all my stormy explanations that he violates age limit for participation in such works, and that the additional logs dropped by him would surely cause a gridlock in the opening he answered with obstinate snuffling and silently went on.

(...the rhetoric is useless to those whose Stubbornness-Mommy was born a moment before them!.. ) 

But I not only talked, I threw the logs too, so that later at midday meal in the kitchen Sasha would not say that he did more than me…
And suddenly he recoiled from the pit, pressing his hand to his face, and blood appeared from under his fingers.
Natasha rushed home to call Mom who came running with a damp cloth to wipe the blood off Sasha’s upturned face.
Dad also came running from the basement and no one listened to my defense that it happened all by accident and not on purpose when a piece of wood thrown by me scratched skin on my brother’s nose.
Mom yelled at Dad how he could allow all that to happen.
Dad also grew angry and told everyone to go home and finished the work himself.
The scratch healed even without the patch which Sasha stubbornly peeled off from his nose even before the midday meal.

(...hardly that my brother would remember all that, it’s only me who recollects and feels guilty: so what if even it was not deliberately? — instead of screaming orations I should have looked better where I was tossing…)

At school, I constantly enrolled in this or that Group, whenever its tutor came to our classroom to recruit volunteers. 
Meetings were held in the late afternoon so that participants had time to go home, have their midday meal and come back to school. 
After learning and training in a Group, its members returned home already in the darkness of the night. 

One evening after the Group activities were over a bunch of participants dropped into the school gym where there was a piano on the stage behind the closed curtain and where one boy showed me once that if you hit only the black keys then it sounds like Chinese music. 
But that evening I forgot all about the music because there on the stage were several boys from the senior grades and they had a pair of real boxing gloves!
We dared to ask permission to touch their shiny leather and try them on.

They allowed us generously and then decided to have a match between the sprats, one from the Gorka—that is living in some of the two Blocks—and another from the “lowlanders”  dwelling in the wooden houses at the bottom of the Gorka hill.
The choice fell on me—O! And I wanted it so much!—and red-haired fatty Vovka from the “lowlanders”.
There was not enough light on the stage to hold the match.
All of us went under the light bulb in the gym hallway with the ink-black winter darkness behind the wide pane glass and they told me and Vovka to fight.

At first we both giggled punching each other with the bulky balls of gloves but then grew hot and angry.
I wanted so much to hit him on the head and in his eyes read that he also was eager to knock me off. 
Soon my left shoulder which parried all his blows was terribly aching and my right hand that kept beating against his shoulder weakened to the utmost.
Probably, he had it no better than me.
Our giggling turned into puffing and gasping.

It was bad and unbearably painful because his blows seemed to penetrate to the very bone of the forearm, but I would rather die than surrender. 
At last, the big boys got bored with such a monotony, they told us ‘enough’ and took away their gloves.
The next morning a purple-black bruise decorated my left forearm.
For several days I was very touchy at that point and even a friendly pat made me crouch and hiss like a gander…

If there was powder snow and not too deep all of our family went out into the courtyard to clean the carpet and the runner.
We spread them face down on the snow and stamped on the back.
Then the carpet was turned over, the snow around it was swept with a broom all over the carpet's face and swept off back again.
Done. 
And we folded the carpet.
The long green runner remained face down after the stamping and the four of us—Mom and the three children—gathered upon it and Dad was dragging the runner through the snowdrifts with all of us standing on the runner's back, leaving a crumpled dust-smeared furrow in the snow behind.
Yes, our Dad's really strong!

And after a slushy snowfall, the boys in our courtyard began to roll the snow up into huge lumps and build a fortress. 
To start with, you make a snowball and put it on a snowdrift and roll it back and forth. 
The lump immediately swells with layers of sticky slush snow.
It grows above your knees, becomes denser, heavier and you have to call for help and, in a team of two or three, roll it to the building site.
The big boys hoist and perch the dense snow lumps on the circular wall that's already higher than you.
We divide into two groups –  the fortress defenders and those who'll assault it. 
The ammunition of snowballs prepared and the assault began.
Shrieks, yells, babel; snowballs swishing from all the sides and in every direction.
I stick out my head above the wall of the fortress so as to hit someone with my snowball but a yellow lightning flashes suddenly in my eyes, like a burst of an electric bulb.
With my back against the wall I slip down, my hands pressed to the eye hit with a snowball.

(… “oh, yes – and I was also killed...”,  so was described that moment by poet Gumilev…)

And the battle rages on, and no one cares about you.
Everything got fused in one general uproar:
‘A-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah!’

The battle was over, the fortress never surrendered but turned into a hillock of snow trampled firm and hard as ice.
But the roar did not stop, we're still yelling and sliding down the hillock on our bellies.
Some hollow deafness had filled your head because of your own and mutual crazy howl:
‘A-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah!’

My eye can see already.
I slap up a snowball and hit the head of a boy older than me.
What a mistake!
Firstly, the battle is over and that boy has come with his skates on.

What made me so reckless?
As always, trying to keep things in proper order, so that everything was right.
At the start of the fortress construction, the eldest boys—seven and eight graders—announced "who does not build will not play". 
And I know for sure that the boy in skates was not among the builders.
But who cares now about the righteous justice?
Many of the founding boys have already left. 
Others have completely forgotten the declaration. 
But there is no time to explain the reasons for your audacity and there is no one who will come to your help, so – run for your life!

And I plunged headlong towards the entrance door of our house.
Maybe he won't catch up?
Running, exhausted with many hours of wild playing, I'm still running. 
The entrance door is already so close!
‘And if he’ll catch up?’ flashes in my head and I get a skate in the ass for such an inappropriate fear.
Slamming the door I fly through the vestibule where he dares not follow – it’s someone else’s house…

(...if you want that everything worked out as it should you mustn’t doubt that so it would…)

In the spring my parents tried their hand at farming.
That is, they decided to plant potatoes.
When with a spade and a bagful of potatoes they started for the forest after work, I begged them to take me too.
We went to an endless clearing, the former border of the Zone before it was expanded.
Dad made holes in the soil that he turned the day before and Mom dropped potatoes into them.
The parents’ faces were sad and Dad shook his head doubtfully.
It’s not the right soil, it’s just a loam. 
Nothing would grow here.
The quiet spring twilight thickened and we went home.

(...a little anticipatory, I’ll say that the attempted kitchen garden had yielded nothing.
Because of the loam or the unnecessary doubt in your business?
But more strange is why did they start it at all? 
To save costs for potatoes?
But we were not so poor then.

In the parents' room there appeared a folding sofa, two armchairs with lacquered armrests and a three-legged coffee table, all in all, named furniture set. 
Probably, they wanted to take a break from all that furniture so the potatoes just served an excuse for going to the forest…) 

And again it was summer only it started much earlier than in previous years.
And together with summer, the Rechka river came into my life. 
Or maybe, the limits of my living space had already expanded to it. 

To start the relations with the Rechka I needed a company of more advanced boys to go downhill along the road with the heat-softened pitch at the joints of its concrete slabs. 
I knew that stretch very well because of my visits to the Detachment Library.
Then we took an unfamiliar shortcut along a tread-path through the thicket on a steep slope until there unfurled the sparkling sunlit flow of the Rechka lapping among innumerable boulders of all sizes.

All the ten-meter-wide river might be crossed without getting deeper than to the waist.
Or you could just stand knee-deep in the fast current and watch as a school of translucent whitebait poked ticklingly at your legs in the greenish twilight of the unstoppably rolling mass of water. 
When out of the river, we played  ‘key-or-lock?’: tries at guessing the would-be form of splash from the stone before throwing it in the water.
If the water splashed up in a single stick, that’s ‘key’; a wider, bush-like splash went for ‘lock’.
In controversial cases, the final decision was made by the boy who played football better or whose flat pebble would do more jumps when ‘baking pancakes’ over the water surface.

Soon I began to go to the Rechka alone or with just one partner but on the river bank, we parted because we came there for fishing. 
All the tackle was a fishing pole from a cut-down willow whip with a length of line tied from its tip. 
The line ended with a hook and a tiny lead sinker before it and a float. 
The float could be made of a brownish wine cork, or be bought from the store — a plucked and pared goose feather painted red-and-white: both popped equally well on the rushing ripples of the rapid current and became thoughtfully still in a small backwater behind boulders…

Fishing is something personal.
One guy pins his hopes on that quiet inlet, the other prefers to have his float hopping on the rapids.
That’s why companions get parted on the river bank.

Fishing is a rushing surge of excitement whenever the float starts at least once.
Hush! Baiting!
The line does not yield, it jibs, bends the pole, cuts the water in zigzags then suddenly gives up and jumping over your head carries to you the sparkling flutter of the caught fish! 
Then, of course, it turns to be not a fish but a small fry.
Never mind! 
The next catch will be tha-a-at big!

More often than anything else there was one of the ‘miserables’ on the hook.
I don’t know their scientific name.
Those fools got caught even by a bare hook with no bait at all.
And they might be hooked at any part of them – at the tail, or belly, or an eye.
Who would care about classifying such morons?

From fishing, I usually brought half a dozen of small fry in a milk-can and Polinna Zimin's cat devoured them with purr and rumble from a saucer put on the landing tiles… 

That day I started fishing from the bridge between the Pumping Station and the Checkpoint on the road out from the Zone. 
I walked as usual after the current, refreshing the bait, adjusting the depth of the hook immersion.
I was an attentive fisherman and only once allowed myself to deviate.
There on a sandy spit near the green bush, I carried out some restoration work to mend the sand sculpture of a woman lying on her back. 
It was created a couple of days before by two soldiers.
You could guess at once that they were soldiers by their black underpants and black boots. 
Who else would wear boots in summer?

I increased the sagging breasts and rounded the hips of the sculpture.
They seemed to be wider than necessary but I did not correct it.
Why did I do it at all?
Very clear, it’s not right to let the work of art to disappear in the rest of sand with all the soldiers’ labor gone to ashes…

(...or was I hooked on the opportunity to spank a female bust and thighs even if just made of sand?
Eew! To hell with Freud and other psychoanalytic schools! 
Let's go back fishing, it’s much more interesting…)

...and I did not roll on top of her like one of the soldiers two days before but just went on fishing.

The current brought the float to the broken dam below the stadium, where ages ago I stumbled off the insidious slab.
So half of the Rechka had been already passed, one half more and it would go beyond the Zone, away from the barbed wire on two rows of poles with the strip of loosened ground in between to catch footprints of the spies.
Half of the way was over and the three-liter milk-can contained just a couple of ‘miserables’.
The cat would be disappointed.


 
When down the river opened the view of the second (and the last) bridge in the Zone, I decided not to go any further but have a try at the Rechka’s sharp bend under the high precipitous bank.
And right there happened that for what people go fishing at all.
The float did not twitch or flinch but slowly and deeply went under the surface.
I pulled back and the vibrating pole in my hands showed mighty resistance in response.
No fish wiggling in the flight. 
I had to pull the tight line all the way close to the bank and drag the fish onto the dry land.

It twisted and curled in the sand and I felt scared because had never seen the like of it: a dark blue piece of a thick hose. 
I threw the ‘miserables' back to the river filled the can with water and lowered the pray into it but the fish had to stand there vertically – its length did not allow it to tumble in the can. 
Two boys came from the bridge, they had already finished fishing and were on their way home.
They asked me about the catch and I showed them the fish.
‘Burbot!’ identified one of them instantly.

When they left I realized that I couldn’t catch anything better, it was time to cut the line and go home.
I walked and the glory ran before me – a couple of boys met me some hundred meters from the Block. 
They wanted to look at the burbot.
And when I was already nearing our house an unfamiliar woman from the corner building stopped me on the path to ask if that was true.
She looked into the can at the round muzzle of the burbot turned asleep by that time and asked me to give it to her.
I immediately and unquestioningly handed over the milk-can and waited while she carried the fish to her home and brought the can back…

In those years, the years were much longer than nowadays and they were filled with much more diverse events. 
For instance, in the same summer with burbot my sister, and brother, and I went to the pioneer camp, though we were not yet young pioneers.

One sunny morning the children from our Block, and from the neighbor one, and the ‘lowlanders'-children from the wooden houses at the Gorka's bottom were collected at the House of Officers where two buses and two trucks with canvas tops were waiting for us. 
Parents gave their respective children suitcases with clothes and bags with all sorts of sweet and tasty things and waved after the departing convoy.

We passed the bridge at the Pumping Station and the white gate of the Checkpoint,  leaving the Object behind the barbed wire that surrounded all of it together with its forest, hills, marshes and the piece of the Rechka.
After the Checkpoint, we turned to the right climbing a prolonged tilt of the highway which we followed for the following half an hour before one more turn to the right, to a forest dirt road among the mighty pine trees.
In the forest, the convoy had to slow down and another half an hour later we drove up to another gate in another fence of barbed wire. 
However, that fence wasn't doubled and there were no sentries at the gate because it was a pioneer camp.

Not far from the gate stood a one-story building of the canteen and rooms for educators, and paramedic, and the Director, and nondescript employees at the camp.
Behind that building, there was a wide field with a high iron mast of ‘giant steps' with canvas loops at the end of chains hanging from the wheel at the mast top but nobody ever used the attraction. 
Along the row of high birch trees at the edge of the field there ran a neat path ending with a pit for broad jumps.
Across the field, the forest began again cut off by the barbed wire nailed to wider tree trunks. 

To the left of the canteen building, a row of green bushes separated from it four square canvas tents with board floor and four beds each for the ninth graders from the first platoon. 
Then followed a level clearing with another iron mast, this time more slender and without chains but with thin cable for the Red Flag of the camp.

In the morning and in the evening the platoons were lined-up along three sides of a big rectangular, facing inside.
The Camp Director, the Senior Pioneer Leader, the mast, and the camp accordionist presented the fourth—really rarefied—side to the formation.
The commanders of the platoons, starting with the youngest, in turn, approached the Senior Pioneer Leader to report that their platoon was lined-up. 
During the report the commanders and the Senior Pioneer Leader held their right arms up, hands straightened, diagonally across their respective faces.
With the reports received, the Senior Pioneer Leader did several steps forward, turned around and approached the Camp Director to report that the camp was lined-up.
Then the Director commanded to hoist or to lower the Red Flag of the camp, depending on the time of day.
The accordionist stretched the bellows of his instrument and played the hymn of the Soviet Union.
Two rank-and-file pioneers called out by the Senior Pioneer Leader for their merits in the camp life approached the mast.
Standing on its both sides, they pulled the cable running through two pulleys—one at the mast top, another a meter from the ground—in turn, changing their hands, and the Red Flag of the camp jerkily crawled along the mast; up in the morning and down in the evening, while the lined-up formation stood with their right arms up, hands straightened, diagonally across their respective faces.


Next to the clearing with the flag mast down a short slope there stood a squat long barrack of planks with two separate bedroom-wards filled with rows of spring-mesh iron beds.
Both wards ended with a door to the square room taking the whole width of the barrack.
There was a small stage with a screen for showing movies and rows of seats for the spectators. 

On the day of arrival, before receiving mattresses and beds the children dropped their bags and suitcases on the floor and went amok leap-racing along the rows of bed spring-meshes tossing you up in the air.
The main thing in that sport is not to run into a jumper running in the opposite direction.
Then everyone opened their suitcases and bags and started to enjoy the sweets flashing them down with the gulps of treacly condensed milk from blue and white tin-cans. 
It turned out that for condensed milk consuming neither an opener nor a spoon was needed.
Just find a nail sticking out on the wall and hit the can lid against it to punch a hole.
Make sure the hole be at the lid edge and not in its center.
Then another hole at the opposite edge and – here you are! – the milk can easily be sucked out through one of the holes without smearing your lips and cheeks as when eating with a spoon from an open tin-can. 
And if you are an unskillful puncher or not tall enough to reach the nail in the wall then ask someone of the elder boys – they would punch it for you for only two sucks from you can. 

In the middle of the square for the lined-up formation, there were patches of loosened ground one for each of the platoons. 
Every day the children laid out the date in their platoon patch with green leaves or chopped off flower heads to win the competition for the best design of the Platoon Calendar. 

On Sundays, parents came to the camp by bus. 
They treat their children with gingerbread, and sweets, and – lemonade!
Our Mom was taking us someplace in the green shade of the trees and watched as we chewed and swallowed, and asked questions about the camp life while Dad snapped his brand new FED-2 camera.

Consuming the treats, we were sharing that the camp life was like camp life.
Not long before all the platoons went out for a hike in the forest and on our return – surprise!
There was a restaurant waiting for us on the floor-boarded platform of the pergola next to the cinema in the barrack.
It turned out that the girls of the senior platoon hadn't participated in hiking and instead set up tables and chairs in the pergola and cooked the dinner together with the canteen workers.

Handwritten menu sheets were put on the tables and everyone was calling the girls with the adult word ‘Waitress!' 
And they approached to receive an order for the ‘May Salad' or the ‘Onion Salad'. 
When the restaurant was over, I accidentally overheard two of the waitresses giggling between themselves that all demanded the ‘May Salad’ but the ‘Onion Salad’ was much more delicious and so their—the waitresses—share became bigger because of the fools hooked by sheer words on a piece of paper.
And I promised myself in future never get fooled with tinsel wrappers...

It’s a pity, that the camp schedule retained a vestige from the kindergarten past under the new name of “stiff hour”.
After the midday meal, everyone would go to their wards and to their beds. 
Get asleep!
Sleeping in the middle of the day just does not work and the two-hour long ‘stiff hour' progressed at a snail rate. 
All the spooky stories had been listened to once again for an umpteenth time: and about the woman in white who drank her own blood, and about the flying black hand with no body to it strangling everybody, and all the other gory horrors there still remained the same thirty-eight minutes before the call 'Get up!'…

Once at the midday meal in the canteen I noticed how three boys from my platoon were exchanging meaningful nods and some secret code signs with their hands.
Clearer than the daylight – there was some collusion.
And me?
And I accosted one of them so stubbornly that he revealed the secret to me.
They conspired to flee the ‘stiff hour' that day and go to the forest where one of them knew a spot with such raspberries that had more berries than leaves in their bushes. 

The midday meal over, the boys ran stealthily in the opposite to the barrack direction.
I followed them, repulsed the leader’s attempt at turning me back to the ward-bedroom and crawled after the others under the barbed wire into the forest.
We armed ourselves with the rifles made of dry tree branches and walked along a wide tread-path among the pines and shrubs.
Then the commander turned into some glade after which we again went into the forest but already without a tread. 
We wandered there for a long time without finding any raspberries but only the bushes of wolf-berries which you should skip eating because it’s poisonous.
Finally, we got fed up with the useless search and the commander confessed he could not find the promised raspberries. 
He was reproached with:
‘Eew! You!’
And we continued wandering through the forest until we found the barbed wire nailed to the trees to form a fence.

Following the prickly guidance of the camp fencing we went out to the already familiar tread-path and our perked-up commander ordered us to fall in.
It seemed we were going to start playing ‘War-Mommy’.
We executed the command and lined-up along the tread-path pressing the dried boughs of our automatic rifles to our stomachs.
And suddenly two grown-up women—the camp caretakers—jumped from behind a thick bush with a loud yell:
‘Drop your weapons!’
We let our sticks fall and in the already formed file were convoyed to the camp gate. 
One of the captors walked ahead of us the other closed the formation.

At the evening all-out lining-up, the Director announced that there happened an incident at the camp and the parents of those involved would be informed besides there would be raised the question of our expelling from the camp. 
After the lining-up was over my brother and sister came up to me from their junior platoon:
‘Now, you’ll have it for sure!’
‘Ah!’ dismissively waved I trying to conceal the fear caused by the uncertainty of the punishment for getting raised the question of expelling.
That uncertainty tormented me till the end of the week with the Parents’ Day on Sunday.
Our parents came as usually and Mom shared between us condensed milk and biscuits and never mentioned my involvement in the disruptive occurrence.
A beam of hope glowed for me – perhaps, the Director forgot to inform them.
When our parent left Natasha told me that Mom had already known about the incident and in my absence asked her who else was among the runaways.
On getting the complete report she turned to Dad and said:
‘Well, you bet, them those aren’t going to be expelled.’

In the end of the summer there occurred some change in the way of the Block's life. 
Every morning and evening a garbage truck came to the courtyard honking loudly and stopped for the tenants of the houses to bring their garbage buckets and empty them into its dump.
They also took away the trash boxes from the garbage enclosure opposite the back of our house and nailed up its gate.

In September in the field between the Bugorok-Knoll and the nailed up enclosure there rumbled and clattered a bulldozer moving mountains of the earth.
When it left there remained a wide field two meters lower than the former one with footprints of its caterpillar tracks in all directions.
A month later they organized a Sunday of Collective Free Work for adults only but my Dad allowed me to go with him too.
On the edge of a wood behind the next block there stood a long building similar to the barrack in the pioneer camp and the people participating in the Sunday of Collective Free Work started to destroy it from all the ends.
My Dad climbed to the top. 
He tore away whole chunks of the roof and sent them falling down shouting his farewell:
‘Eh! Pulling down differs from building up – the soul doesn’t pain!’

I did not like the Sunday of Collective Free Work very much.
They would drive you away everywhere:
‘Don’t come closer!’
And just listening to the screams of the nails being torn from the beams and boards gets boring quite soon…

(...I cannot now recollect – on the eve of that Sunday or immediately after it Nikita Khrushchev was deposed and Leonid Brezhnev became the main leader of the USSR in his place.
Ew! 
And all that when there remained no more than mere eighteen years before the establishing of Communism in our country!..)

In his very practical book, Seton-Thompson insists that bows have to be made of ash-tree boughs. 
But could you find an ash-tree at the Object, eh?
Its forest and woods was populated with pines and fir trees, and also deciduous birch and aspen, and all the rest might be considered just shrubs. 
That’s why, following the advice of the neighbor from our landing, Stepan Zimin, I made my bows of the juniper.
It’s important to do the right choice, the juniper for a bow should not be too old with lots of side branches, nor too thick which would be impossible to bend.
A tree of about one and a half meter tall would be the thing, both springy and strong.
The arrow shot from the bow made from such a juniper rises in the gray autumn sky about thirty meters, you'd barely see it, and then it falls precipitously and sticks in the ground because its arrowhead is a nail fixed with electrician's tape. 
The arrow shaft should be made of a thin plaster lath: split it lengthwise and round the shaft off with a knife and sandpaper. 
Only my arrows had no fletching although Seton-Thompson explained how to do it.
But where could I get the feathers?
No use to ask Dad there's nothing but machinery at his work. 

At the winter holidays, I learned that the boys of our two blocks often went to the Regiment to watch movies in the Regiment Club. 
The Regiment was where the soldiers continued their army service after graduating the Recruit Depot.
Going there for the first time was a bit scary because the children exchanged vague rumors about some soldier strangling some girl in the forest.
No child could explain how and why but the bad soldier must have been a “blackstrapper” while in the Regiment all the soldiers wore red shoulder straps.
The way to the Regiment was not short.
Two times as long as to school and after bypassing it the trail became wider and straighter and most of the way under the big fir trees until you went out onto an asphalt road.
It led to the gate with sentries but they did not stop boys and you could go on to the building with the signboard Regiment Club.

On entering the building you got into a long corridor with three double doors in its blind wall.
The other wall had windows in it and between them, as well as between the double doors, there hung a row of same-sized pictures portraying different soldiers and officers with short descriptions of their selfless deeds and heroic deaths defending our Soviet Motherland.

The wide double doors opened to a huge hall without windows and filled with rows of plywood seats facing the wide stage behind velvet crimson curtains partly drown both sides to open the wide white screen for movies.
The passage from the stage to the back wall with square black holes for movies projection divided the hall in two.
The soldiers came in in groups stomping their boots at the boards of the paint-coated floor and gradually filled the seats and the hall with the thick hum of their talking to each other.
Time dragged on very slowly.
There were no pictures on the whitewashed walls and I re-read, over and over again, the two inscriptions on the red-clothed frames that hid the speaker boxes on both sides of the stage. 
A portrait of a head with a wide beard and a thick turf of hair was mounted onto the left frame followed by the lines of words: 
"In science, there is no wide highway, and only who fears no fatigue and keeps climbing its stony tread-paths will reach its shiny peaks." 
The signature beneath explained whose words and head it was – “K. Marx.”
And next to the right half of the withdrawn velvet curtain a head without hair and with a small wedge-like beard made it clear even before reaching the signature that it was Lenin who said:
“The cinema is not only an agitator but also a remarkable organizer of the masses.”

As the soldiers filled the hall the schoolboys moved from the front rows over to the stage and watched the movies from the back side of the screen.
What's the difference if the Amphibian Man made his dive not from the left to the right but on the contrary? 
And the rebel Kotovsky would all the same escape from the courtroom through the window.
Although, some boys stayed in the hall perching on the armrests between the seats. 
The soldiers did not mind.

At times in the darkness illuminated by the flicks of the running movies there sounded a yell from one of the three doors:
‘Lance-corporal Solopov!’
Or else:
‘The second squad!’
But any yell ended the same way:
‘To the exit!’
If the movies suddenly broke off and the hall sank in complete darkness there arose a deafening wall of whistles and rambling boot stomp at the floor and yells ‘shoemaker!!’ from all the sides.

After the movies at the Regiment, we walked home through the night forest retelling each other the episodes of what we had just watched together. 
‘Now! I say! The way he punched him!’
‘Hey! Hey! I say! The guy never knew what hit him!’

Of course, the Regiment Club was not the only place for movie-going. 
There always was the House of Officers but there you had to buy a ticket and, therefore, come with your parents and they never had time for movies.
True, on Sundays, they demonstrated there a free film for schoolchildren: black and white fairy tales or a color film about a young partisan pioneer Volodya Dubinin. 

One winter Sunday morning I told Mom that I was going out to play.
‘Think before talking! Who would be playing outside in such a weather?’
Behind the glass pane of the kitchen window, the murky dusk was scraped by the lines of the scudding rime snow. 
‘See what a mayhem?’
But I croaked and grumbled and did not want to leave her alone until Mom got angry and told me to go wherever I wished. 
I went out into the desolate courtyard. 
No one at all.

The courtyard looked too gloomy to stay there.
Turning my face away from the slapping and whipping by the wild snow torrents I went round the house corner and crossed the road to the field next to the abundant garbage enclosure. 
There obviously was also nobody except me but I couldn’t see myself.
All I could see was the complete turmoil full of the violent blizzard lashing the dull gray world with the long snake-like belts of prickly snow.
I felt lonely and wanted to be back home.
But Mom would say:
‘So I told you!’
And the younger ones would start to laugh.

Then from the far edge of the field where long-long ago they played volleyball and gorogki there came a voice of the aluminum loudspeaker on top of a wooden pillar not seen in so hurly-burly a weather. 
‘Dear children! Today we’ll learn a song about the Merry Drummer. Listen to it first.’
And the well-trained quire of child voices began to sing of a clear morning at the gate and the maple drumsticks in the hands of the Merry Drummer. 
The song was over and the announcer commenced to dictate the lyrics so that the listeners by their radios would write it down word for word. 
‘Get up ear-ly, get up ear-ly, get up ear-ly, with the first light of the mor-ning by the gate...’

And I already was not alone in the grim world getting its lashing.
I waded through the snowdrifts but the snow could not get me because of my thick pants tight over my felt boots.
The announcer finished dictating the first verse and let me listen to it sung by the quire. 
Then he dictated the second also with the subsequent singing through it, and the third.
‘Now, listen to the whole song, please.’

And there became quite a lot of us – the Drummer, the children with their merry voices, and even the blizzard turned into one of us and wandered with me across the field hither and thither.
Only that I kept falling through the crust into the sifted powder snow under it and the blizzard danced above scattering its prickly pellets.

When I got home Mom asked:
‘Well, seen anyone there?’
I said ‘no’ but no one laughed.

The solitary walk in the big company under the dictation of the Merry Drummer laid me up in bed with the high temperature. 
Everyone went to work and to school.
With the books from the Detachment Library finished and no one around to go there to exchange them for me, I had to take one from our one-shelf home library in the parents' room. 
I chose the one that for a long time had been attracting me by its title and at the same time repelling with its thickness: ‘War and Peace' by Tolstoy, in four volumes. 
The opening chapter confirmed my fears by its text in French, page after page, yet it eased off when I noticed that there was the translation in the page notes below.

Because of that novel, I did not notice my illness. 
I hastily swallowed the medicines and returned to Pierre, Andrey, Petya, Natasha; at times forgetting to take the thermometer out from the armpit.
I read all the volumes with the epilogue and only the concluding part – the discourse on predestination I couldn't overcome. 
Its endless sentences turned into a glossy wall, I climbed a bit up just only to inevitably slip back to its foot.
The insurmountable wall stretched in both directions and I couldn't figure out where I got there from. 
I had to close the last volume without reading up to the end.

(...a couple of years ago I re-read the novel from cover to cover and said, that if a person was able to write like Tolstoy in that concluding part of "War and Peace" then why to trouble themselves with all that prelude fiction including the epilogue? 
Perhaps, I kinda showed off, in part, but only just in part…)

And while I was lying on my folding bed mixed with the field of Austerlitz, life was not standing still.
My sister and brother were bringing news that the trash enclosure had been pulled down and a shed was erected in its place.
They turned the field between the shed and the Bugorok-Knoll into a skating rink! 
As big as all that field leveled by the solitary bulldozer in autumn.
Then there arrived a fire-engine, they dropped the hoses on the ground and leaked tons of water.
It's a real skating-rink now! 
And they lend out skates at the shed.
Anyone can come and borrow skates or bring their own and go skating!

I did not want to lag behind the life and quickly recovered.
However, I was late.
They were no longer lending skates at the shed and you had to bring them with you.
The benches in the shed were still in place and you could sit down and put on the skates you had brought and leave your felt boots under the bench or in a locker while you were skating. 

Actually, there were two sheds, back to back, and two doors above a high wooden porch.
The right door led to the locker-room and the other to the warm-up room with the skate grinder and a stove made of a wide iron barrel.
The hot fire crackled in the stove to warm your frozen hands or dry up your mittens. 
You had to look out though – were the mittens not removed in time they started to smell with singed wool of which they are knitted.
Yak!

No words could ever describe my desire to be a skater.
How deliciously crunched the ice under the steel of the skates!
And you didn’t run, you flew like a swift with the skates having turned into wings!

I started learning with double-bladed skates with strings for tying them to the boots.
I was laughed at for using such a kindergarten plaything.
‘Snegoorki’ came in their place, the round-nosed skates of one blade each, but also with the strings for tying.
And nothing came out of them, no flight, no joy, just some odd iron pieces on my felt boots.
Finally, Mom brought from someplace real “half-Canadians” – riveted to the shoes of their own with long white band laces.
With those real skates hung over my shoulder I hurried to the locker-room at the skating rink.
I put them on and went out on the ice.
All I could get there was an awkward hobbling back and forth.
The skates did not want to stand evenly. 
They kept falling in or out painfully twisting my feet.
I had to return back to the locker-room walking the snow drifts around the skating rink where dense snow kept the skate blades upright and they no longer tried to break my ankles out. 

The last attempt occurred in the evening when Dad came home from work and had his supper.
At my request, he tightly laced the "half-Canadians" over a pair of thick-knitted wool socks making them one with my legs. 
I went out and clattered down the stairs holding onto the railing.
From where the railing ended to the entrance door I walked with my hand to the wall.
The outer wall of the house supported me on my way around the building.
Further on there were auxiliary snow drifts but the road I had to cross fluttering my hands as a tightrope walker. 
At last, I got to the skating rink but it all happened again – the skates were breaking my feet in and out despite the tight lacing. 
For some time I stood there in pain and envy to the crowd of wing-footed lucky ones rushing around me then started the endless agonizing way back.

(...and never more in my life, I tried to skate. 
Who’s born to crawl – cannot fly…)

On one of the clear days off our landing neighbor, Stepan Zimin, called me and his son Yura to have a ski walk in the forest.
For that occasion, Dad went down to our basement section and brought the skies. 
Each of them had a leather loop in the middle to put the nose of your felt boot into and a length of the white rubber band like that in underpants. 
That band, tied in a loop upon the leather loop, embraced the felt boot heel preventing the ski slide away.
Both Yura and I had a pair of ski poles each but Stepan went out with just skies on his feet and—whew!—he did not need the poles!
He glided down the Hillock and we followed, falling and getting up to glide further.
Then we turned into the forest to the left from the Recruit Depot Barracks and walked through the almost impenetrable thicket of the half-dried pine trees.
We saw a couple of square holes under the snow there.
Stepan explained they were dugouts during the war for the soldiers to live in. 
I couldn’t fit it into my mind.
The war ended before my birth, that’s ages and ages ago.
In the course of so long a time all the trenches, and dugouts, and bomb-holes should be completely blurred and effaced from the earth...

Never again Stepan Zimin went out for a ski walk but I liked skiing and started to glide down the hillocks and knolls nearest to the road surrounding the two blocks.

When they held ski competition among the school children I, of course, volunteered to participate and on the eve of the cross-country race asked Dad to change the worn out rubber bands on the leather loops of my skies. 
He casually dismissed the problem – they’d hold on, nothing to bother about.

The start was given from the glade where in autumn they pulled down the barrack on the Sunday of Collective Free Work.
From the start point the ski track went into the forest and after zigzagging there for a couple kilometers returned back. 
Start and finish at the same point: two in one.
Our group of fourth-and-fifth graders was flagged off all at once with a senior schoolboy running ahead of us so that we wouldn’t go astray at a wrong ski track.

I was getting overtaken and I was overtaking others with the eager shouts ‘The track! The track!’ so that they give way along two narrow paths of the pressed snow.
And then I reluctantly stepped aside into the untrodden sticky snow when they shouted ‘The track!' behind my back, because that's the rule. 
We ran and we glided.
Down a steep slope, we piled in over each other. 
I got from the pile one of the first and frantically rushed ahead but some two hundred meters before the finish that meanie rubber band burst on my right felt boot and the ski ran away. 
Keeping back the burning tears I reached the finish line in only left ski driving the right one with kicks along its part in the ski track.
The refs liked it, they laughed, but I, on coming home, burst into tears:
‘I knew it! I warned! I asked!’

Mom went on at Dad.
He wanted to talk back but did not find what to say.
The next day he fixed to the leather loops of the skies an elastic band of ivory color, as thick as a little finger, which he brought from his work. 

(...that fixture never failed and even twenty-two years later the band served as it should. 
Skies, on the whole, are dogged long-liver...)


With so reliable fasteners, on Sundays, I was taking to the wood for all day long. 
The endless well-trodden ski track stretched from beyond of anything to another one.
At times the ski track bifurcated and two tracks ran along side by side.
I liked the sound of skies slapping at the ski track.
On the way, I sometimes met single soldier-skiers that enjoyed their Sundays without the army greatcoats just in uniform shirts without the belts around. 

The unswerving ski track led to my favorite gliding spot – a deep combe where the speed gained by the onrush down one slope took you almost to one-third of the opposite one. 
I was delighted by it and proud that I could plunge like those solitary soldiers although falling at times especially at the jump ramp they built of snow for their jumps.

One day I noticed a secluded ski track diverging from the mainline track which—as I gradually figured it out—was running along the controlling clearing of the Zone-Object-Detachment before its expansion. 
The branching ski track led me to a magnificent ski-plunge slope in the depth of the thicket.
Though the slope was grown with perennial fir-giants dictating an abrupt turn at the bottom, but, if you did not fall at that point, the plunge took you unimaginably far away with the speed squeezing tears from your eyes and making repeat the plunge again and again… 

The next Sunday I almost did not fall at that tricky turn and rode the slope until very late when the deep violet shadows began to trickle down from the fir trees dense branches bent with the thick layer of snow. 
Then all of a sudden there came a strange feeling that I was not alone and someone was watching me from behind the backs of the mighty firs.
At first, it was scary but then I listened to the good-will silence of the surrounding forest and realized that it was him, the forest, friendly spying on me because we were one – me and the forest. 
The twilight deepened and I remembered that the Block was more than two kilometers away.

(...Of course, I got home in the dark and Mom let me have it…
Yet, until now when remembering that deep violet winter twilight and the quietness of the friendly forest I know that I lived not just so.

The same sense of dissolution and being a part to everything else around, when you cannot say where your “I” ends and turns into “not-me”, I lived through once again in Karabakh.
Only that time I was the watcher and it happened in summer instead of winter.
Though, telling this story somewhat violates the linear flow of the narrative and goes against the grain of the classical canons of the time-place-action unity, but, after all, it’s my letter and it’s my life and why not to take turns to my liking.
So...)

In Stepanakert, I cannot be seen a day or two before my birthday and about as long after it. 
Because for that period I go to freedom.

(...see? It’s very convenient to be born in summer…)

My local relatives have already ceased to be surprised or get angry.
They decided that it’s an old, odd but established Ukrainian tradition – to go away for your birthday and walk just where your eyes look.
And right that way it was in August (I don’t remember the exact year) end nineties.  
No later, because I have had this tent since the end of the millennium. 

That August I went north through the woods on tumbs where there were no villages but the views of inexpressible beauty. 
Just as my Mom warned me, “You’ll be there alone.”
After a day-long climbing up an ascending ridge of tumbs where the woods are replaced with the alpine meadows, I came across some soot-black pieces of slate and several charred poles.
Apparently, before the war shepherds were coming there with their flocks and they brought the construction materials to build a hovel.
And who burned it?
Well, you never know…
A lightning could strike too…
Anyway, nothing of my business.

I went on – higher, and in a saddle bridging two tumbs I saw an ancient tomb.
How did I guess its antiquity?
An easy question. 
It was excavated. 
Someone had been looking for a buried treasure.
There remained a hole in the ground and four to five roughly hewn stone slabs, half a ton each.
They didn’t bury that way under the socialism, nor in the capitalist epoch.
The nearby crests were not rocky so the slabs had to be transported from afar.
What for?
Well, one look around would remove the question – you’re in the middle of incredible beauty: the sky without any limit, the motionless rolling waves of the tumbs; the distant ones covered with woods, the nearby with meadows.
But to bring the slabs from as far as even I don’t know where would call for a plum sum of money, or real power, or both.
The clues are more than enough – it was one of the Karabakh melique-princes. 
One day he rode out hunting, reached that place and fell in love with it and didn’t want to part with it even after his demise.
A nagging flaw in the calculations: the greed of ashes desecrators was not taken into account.
See?
We can solve any enigma of the history when there’s no one to oppose our tall stories.

I passed over to the next tumb and on its summit got under the rain.
For such occasions, I've got a special and rather practical technique. 
I take off all my clothes and pack them into a cellophane bag and start to dance in altogether under the downpour.
Dancing, in this case, is not a pagan ritual, it's for keeping warm; up in the mountains without the sun and under the rain it's really chilly, take my word. 
Yet, probably, there is something from paganism in it too, otherwise where my uncontrollable yells would come from.
Anyway, solitude has certain advantages – you don’t get arrested for violation of public order.
With the rain over, I dry myself with the sweater and put on the dry clothes from the bag, ain’t I a smart guy?

But that time after one rain there came another and my second dancing was not so enthusiastic as the first.
The additional rain also stopped after all and I prepared to stay overnight in a shallow hollow so that the wind would not gnaw at me too much.
About midnight the drops of one more rain tap-tapped on my sleeping bag and I realized that I was kaput.
A raging stream of rainwater ran down the hollow, I struggled out of the sleeping bag put it on my back and stood with my legs wide apart giving way to the running spate.
I could not leave the hollow either – the squally wind joined the rain.
There was nothing to do but wait for the dawn in the posture of the letter "z" clutching my knees with my hands under the soaked through and through sleeping bag on my back and the rivulet running between my feet. 
The uncontrollable inside tremor mixed with the outside lashing by chilly rains which I lost count of that night.

The morning started with a thick fog, but without rain and the wind was falling.
Shaking like an epileptic, I squeezed the water out of my clothes and the sleeping bag, as much as it was possible for my cold-stiffened hands.
I had no desire to go any further.
Hearth and home were all I craved for.
I went back but walking did not warm me. 
I was busy being trembling.

Normally, going downhill is easier than going uphill, but for me, that difference, for some reason, was gone, and at times I was kind of like floating while to the hearths of civilization there remained at least a day of normal walking. 
And then I remembered the slate – it’s much closer if only I could find it.
It's somewhere along the edge of the wood. 
And down that tumb I was descending in zigzags so as not miss the slate pieces in the tall grass.
And I did find the place.

Festered with the sticky shivering tremor I started to restore the shed and the work warmed me better than walking.
What I constructed looked like a crude tent of fire-smeared slate pieces.
It was tall enough for sitting inside on the ground and more than enough for stretching in it with the whole length of the body. 
Then I built the fire at the entrance with the wreckage of poles and deadwood that I dragged from the nearby forest. 
I warmed my sides by the fire and began to dry up the sleeping bag.
When the color of its fabric turned lighter and stopped issuing any steam I realized that I'd survive. 

All the next day the sun was shining blindingly but I had a slanted roof of slates over my head supported by the charred poles walked by the soundless lizards as lazy as I was because in all the day I went out just once – to collect an armful of grass to spread it under the sleeping bag on the ground.

And so it went day after day without any changes if not for the growing company – cautious mice joined me and the lizards.
They did not dare to step over the fire ashes so I left a piece of baked potato outside, but the rest, together with bread and cheese, hung in the haversack under the slate. 

At nights the full moon rose, filling the world with clear-cut shadows.

On one of those well illuminated nights I went out to take a leak and on the way through the tall grass there burst from under my feet a fluttering brood of partridges with the cry:
‘Damn sleepwalker! Watch your step! We’re sleeping here!’
As if they did not scare me! 

In the light of day, over the wide expanse of the valleys, the vultures glided without moving their wings.
From the depths of valleys they had been usually seen far-far above, but laying on my sleeping bag I didn't even have to stick my head out of the slate tent. 
When one of them trespassed the invisible borderline between their hunting grounds the skylord soared higher and, folding his wings fell down upon the intruder like a stone.
I heard the whistling sound of air cut but his dive next to the tent entrance.
He missed, however, or maybe was not keen on hitting but only to shoo off the saucy sneaker.
We all are blood kin after all.

So it went on.
All my business was to roll over from one side to the other, from the belly to the back, having no desires, ambitions, plans. 
Sometimes I fell asleep disregarding the time of day, it made no difference.
Well, and besides I watched, of course.
I watched how beautiful and perfect the world is.
Sometimes I think, maybe the purpose of man’s existence is just seeing this beauty and perfection.
Man’s merely a mirror for the world to look into otherwise it would not know how beautiful it is.

Six days later I had to go back to the civilization. Just for the sake of righteousness.

On my return to all the questions, I only gave one-syllable answers because my vocal cords from being idle for so long became too lazy and I could speak only in a hoarse whisper. 

(...all I want to say is that in both cases—in the winter forest and among the summer tumbs—I had the same feeling that I was not alone and someone else was watching that ski-riding kid and the lazybones prostrate in the shade of burned slate pieces and, more strangely, I was a part of that someone and watched myself from the twilight of the forest and from the tall grass on the tumb slope because we all are involved…
On the whole, some complete mess…)

With the spring nearing, we, the fourth graders, started active preparation for getting admitted to the ranks of young pioneers.
We copied and memorized the Solemn Oath of the Young Leninist.
One day Seraphima Sergeevna entered the classroom after the break with an unknown woman.
She introduced her as the new School Pioneer Leader and said that we were going to have a Leninist Lesson and had to go out into the corridor but keep very quiet because the other classes were having their regular lessons. 

We went out into the long corridor of the second floor where on the wall between the doors to the classes there hung pictures with Lenin in them. 
The Pioneer Leader commenced from the very beginning.
Here, he’s quite a young man, actually a youth, after the execution of his elder brother Alexander by the tsarist regime, consoles his mother with the words ‘We’ll go another way’, which is the name of this famous picture, by the way.
And our class followed her quietly to the poster with his photograph in the group of comrades from the underground committee…

The working silence reigned in school, we passed by the closed doors of the classrooms with the school children inside and only we, like secret conspirators went off the usual course of the school regime and seemed to have joined the life of the underground, following the quiet voice leading us from a picture to a picture… 

Then again the spring came and again the thawed patches appeared on the slope between the Block and the Recruit Depot Barracks but I wasn't checking them anymore. 

On my way from school to home, I took over an unfamiliar girl of my age.
Maybe, from the parallel fourth grade. 
I looked back at her face full of complete unawareness of my presence. 
I had to show her that I was a boy of consequence in the surrounding whereabouts. 
And, by the way, I had a gang around, like Robin Hood, the noble robber.
Turning to the left and still walking on, I speak with the eloquent signs to the Bugorok-Knoll on the other side of the decaying skating rink:
‘Hey! Don’t be so careless! Duck!! Or they’d notice you!’
So, if the snooty girl looked that way no one would be seen there... 

Another time, with the snow already gone, I was passing the same spot and squinting.
Because when you squint without closing your eyes completely but only to the point of eyelash rows touching each other you’d see the world as if through the transparent wings of a dragonfly.
And I, actually, was not walking but flying in a tiny dragonfly-like helicopter that I saw in ‘The Funny Pictures’ because even though I was past the preschool age I still sometimes looked through that magazine for small kids.
And then I remembered how rebellious Kotovsky, in the movie ‘Kotovsky’ at the Regiment Club, answered the arrogant landlord:
‘I am Kotovsky!’
Then he grabbed him and threw through the window panes of the landlord's house. 
And I too grab the rich scoundrel by the breast of his jacket and throw him into the roadside ditch.
I like to call myself with the glorious name:
‘I am Kotovsky!’
And I like to be so strong.
That’s why I re-played the episode several times walking up the road to the Block.
Why not? 
Who would see?
At home, Mom told how she and Polinna Zimin had a hearty laugh watching through the neighbor's window my throws of nobody knew who. 
But I never admitted that I was Kotovsky...

And at the end of April, we became young pioneers. 
The ceremony took place not at school but in front of the House of Officers because there stood the big gypsum head of Lenin on the high pedestal.
The night before Mom ironed my trousers through gauze and the white parade-shirt and the scarlet triangle of pioneer tie.
All those things she hung over the back of a chair so that in the morning everything would be ready.
When there was no one in the room, I touched the soft silk of the pioneer tie.
Mom said she had bought it from the store, but how’s that possible they sell such things.

The bright morning sun was shining.
We, the fourth graders, stood facing the lined-up ranks of the school children.
Our scarlet ties hung on our right arms bent at the elbow, the collars of our shirts turned up for the senior graders to easily tie our ties to us.
But before we canted the Solemn Oath in front of our comrades to love our Motherland hotly, to live and learn and struggle as admonished by great Lenin, as we are being taught by the Communist Party… 

One week before the end of the academic year I fell ill. 
Mom thought it was cold and told me to stay in bed but could not bring the temperature down and when it rose to forty she called an ambulance from the Detachment Hospital because with two more degrees it's the lethal temperature. 
I was too lightheaded to be proud or frightened that a whole vehicle came after just me.
At the hospital, they at once diagnosed pneumonia and began to knock the temperature down with penicillin injections every half an hour. 
I did not care.
A day later the injections frequency was reduced to one per hour.
he next day two per hour.

The patients in the ward were all adults – soldiers from the Regiment.
Four days later I was quite Okay and walking in the garden around the Hospital when our class together with the teacher came to visit me and hand over the report card with my grades.
I felt uncomfortable and, for some reason, ashamed and ran away around the corner together with the boys of our class.
But then we returned and the girls together with the teacher presented me with the award for successful studies and exemplary behavior.
It was ‘The Russian Epic Tales’ which Grandma Martha read to me and to my sister and brother, but only quite new.

That way, little by little, things began somehow repeat themselves in my life…

In summer we again were taken to the pioneer camp to the same canteen, lining-ups, bedroom ward, ‘stiff hours’, and Parental Days.
Though some things had changed. 
As a full-fledged pioneer, I already belonged to the Third Platoon which, together with the First and Second ones, was eligible for swimming in the lake. 
But first, we had to wait a week and hope that it shouldn’t rain on the appointed day.
We waited impatiently and the weather on the swimming day was not rainy and we were taken in the trucks with a canvas top to the Sominsky lake. 

The road was going all through the forest along a clearing.
And it was very long too because we had sung all pioneer songs, and  ‘we marched to the ding of the cannonade...', and my favorite ‘ah, potato's so tasty-tasty-tasty-tasty...', and, well, all that we knew, anyway, but the road did not end and I felt sick with all those jolts on the bumps. 
Then those who sat at the square window cut in the front canvas shouted that something was seen ahead and the truck pulled up on a grassy shore of a big lake in the midst the forest.
They allowed us to enter the water not all together but in turn – one platoon after another.
The water was very dark and the bottom soft and sticky and they at once yelled from the shore:
‘Third platoon – out!’

At first, I only hopped standing in the water up to the chest.
But then they gave me a life ring and showed how to row with my hands and kick my legs for swimming.
Soon they became bored to command the platoon in and out of the water and everybody remained there as long as they wanted.
I let the air out of the life ring and checked that I could still swim for a couple of meters.
When at the end of the day they yelled everybody to get ashore because we were leaving I tarried a bit to make sure once again that the skill remained with me and gratefully uttered in my mind: 
‘Thank you, Sominsky!’

Next time they took us to the Lake of Glubotskoye.
The elder platoons said it was even better – there were a beach and sandy bottom. 
The road was much longer but asphalted and we were going by bus so I was not sick at all.
It was a huge lake indeed.
They said the lake had channels connecting it to other lakes where there were passenger boats and the big Ant Island.
The island was so big that there once was a monastery there and giant ant-heaps in the forest around it.
Whenever some monk was not behaving they tied him up and dropped onto some of the ant-heaps.
The ants thought it was an attack and defended their city so that in one day from the punished there remained only the bare bones of the gnawed skeleton.

But from the bathing place neither boats no islands were visible only a very distant opposite shore.
And the bottom really turned out to be sandy and pleasant to the touch of feet only you had to wade for a long time before reaching a place deep enough for swimming.
When wading back I deeply cut my feet near the big toe.
I bleed profusely and on the shore, they at once bandaged the wound. 
A dark spot wetted through the bandage but the blood leakage was stopped. 
They yell to everybody to be cautious and then one of the adults found a broken bottle in the sandy bottom and threw it further away in the direction of the opposite shore but it did not console me.
On the way back I even began to cry grieved by the fact that from the whole bus only my foot was cut.
One of the caretakers told me:
‘Shame! Are you a guy or a rug?’
And I stopped whining and in the subsequent life, I was ashamed to moan when it pained. 

Twice per shift, we were taken to the bath-house in the nearby village of Pistovo. 
The first time I missed – I went back to the platoon ward to collect the forgotten bar of soap and when I ran back to the canteen the buses had already left.
The camp became empty and quiet, there remained only the cooks at the canteen and me. 
You could do whatever you wanted and go wherever you wished even to the tents of the First Platoon with four iron beds on the unpainted floor-boards and the finely carved shadows of the nearby tree foliage dancing upon the canvas walls. 
But I, for some reason, climbed upon the booth without a roof but with an iron barrel on top of its plank walls. 
It was the shower for the caretakers and pioneer leaders.
They filled barrel with buckets of water for the sun to heat it.

All the two hours of solitude I spent atop that booth, wandering along the narrow beams supporting the barrel until the camp returned from Pistovo.
And I did not miss the second visit to the bath-house but I was disappointed – no baths at all!
You had to wash from a tin basin with tin ears for grabbing and carrying.
There were two taps side by side on the wall, one with boiling hot water the other with cold. 
Put your basin on a low table under them and fill it while the line of boys behind you with their empty basins in hands yell to be quick... 

The shift at the camp traditionally ended with the Farewell Bonfire.
It was built at the far end of the field with the rusty mast of never used attraction,  near the edge of the forest behind the barbed wire.
After the breakfast in the morning, the senior platoons marched to that forest through a temporarily made passage in the barbed wire fence and harvested dry firewood for the Farewell Bonfire. 
The harvesting went on also after the midday meal so by the evening in the field accumulated a heap of dry branches exceeding the height of a grown-up man. 

In the dusk of the nearing summer night that heap was set on fire from all sides and burnt with high flames under our choral songs and the marches from the accordionist.
The Director and the caretakers were arguing about something with agitated voices. 
In the end, the Director agreed and gave the orders to his chauffeur. 
The man answered:
‘You know better,’ and went to the camp buildings and came back by the Director’s car.
The chauffeur took a metal canister from the car trunk and the pioneers got the order to step back from the fire.
He splashed onto the fire from the canister and a huge ball of red-and-black flame with the buzzing sound swirled up in the night  – no less than for three meters and fell back again until the next splash.
Next morning the buses were taking us home...

However, the end of a camp shift did not mean the end of the summer. 
And again the Rechka river, games of ‘War-Mommy’, ‘Cossacks-and-robbers’, ’American’, and ‘Twelve Chips’.
And the new adventures borrowed from the Detachment Library.

However, in addition to visiting distant planets and mysterious islands at the opposite armrests of the sofa, I wandered in the forest too. 
The reasons could be quite different.
For instance, our neighbor Yura Zimin called to go picking the Hare Cabbage and I got curious about the cabbage I never saw. 
Well, it's sour but tasty only harvesting it is a real toil because of its too tiny leaves. 
Or my sister Natasha would share the news that in the swamp behind the next block there were myriads of blueberries! 
One boy brought home a whole milk-can of them!
And the spirit of competition drove me to the same swamp – I’d collect more than any ‘one boy’.

But usually I wandered alone and almost without any purpose; well, except for looking for a juniper worth of making another good bow, or collecting green pine cones for all sorts of hand-crafted toys. 
Stick four matches into a green cone and here you have the body of a quadruped. 
Add a vertical match to the body standing on all the four – it’s a neck; set onto it a smaller cone – wow! – you’ve got a horse!
Just don’t forget to attach a tail to it.

After green cones, you have to climb up young pine trees with smooth light brown bark that peels off too easily and smears your hands with the colorless sticky resin which in a few minutes will make your palms black but on your pants remains as whitish spots, also sticky though. 
The young pines are rocking with the wind and under your weight – class!
And their cones are so nice – green scales densely pressed to each other and as if lacquered.
The cones on the ground under old big pines are also old and black. 
Their scales are all apart and ruffled.
The big pines also have got green cones but those are at the tips of the branches where you cannot climb and which you cannot pull and bend because of they are too thick... 

New occupations spread like a prairie fire among boys. 
Some boy put his hand on a new trick and you hardly have time to blink your eye before all are already carried away by the production of explosives. 

Making a mine is easy.
You fill a glass bottle with water up to three-quarter then push inside a wisp of grass and pour bluish pieces of carbide on top.
(Carbide is stored in an iron barrel at the construction site of a five-story building across the road surrounding the Block.
Soldiers-blackstrappers would wink at your ladling handfuls of it into your pocket.)
Now seal the bottle with a cork carved from a wood chip, turn the bottle upside down and insert it into some pile of sand or soil.
Done.
It only remains to wait until the carbide after getting in contact with water in the bottle issues so much gas that its pressure will explode the bottle with a loud pop sending sand and glass splinters in all directions.
A word of warning.
Do not cut your fingers when carving the wood cork.
And when sitting on the ground and driving the cork into the charged bottle don’t keep the bottle between your thighs: it might crack cutting with its neck your thigh just where the shorts end as it was in my case.

Because of too much book-reading, I was lagging behind the flow of events in ever-changing public life. 
For instance, putting a book aside I spread it on the sofa with the covers upward and went out into the courtyard. 
What’s up?!
A caravan of differently aged boys were crossing it dragging pieces of boards, planks, and beams. 
I ran up to ask: what? How? Where?
They told me to run to the construction site of the five-story building where another group of boys collected construction materials which a blackstrapper soldier-guard generously allowed to lift.

I arrived just in time to grab the end of a long plank begged of the guard by elder boys.
The soldier only said to take it away quickly before anyone had seen.
We carried the pillage across the courtyard and down the Gorka and into the forest at the bottom of the steep slope of earth moved by the bulldozer when leveling the field for the skating rink.
There between the trees sounded hand-saws and hammers clapped in the full heat of eager labor.

The elder boys were sawing boards and nailing them to the pillars piled into the ground. 
With the trained eye of a Construction Modelling Designer I saw at once it was a shed without windows with the already hinged door and the ceiling of long planks.
There was a wooden ladder inside under the square hatch in the ceiling.
I climbed up and out onto the flat roof-ceiling.
A pair of big boys there were discussing whether the roof was strong enough and that the shed would be the headquarters of boys from our Block.
I asked for a chance to work with a handsaw or hammer but neither of them gave me it and they even commanded me to go down and not strain the roof with my weight.
I climbed down the ladder.
In the half-dark shed and around it remained no one of my peers and I went home to the book on the sofa. 
I was happy that the boys of our Block would have Headquarters of their own, like Timur and his team from the book by Gaidar.

Later, when wandering in the forest I always approached the shed but nobody was there and a big padlock hung on its door.
In the autumn next to the shed appeared a stack of hay and a team of chicken migrated to it through the square hen-way sawed out in the bottom of the door. 
The Headquarters was canceled.


My Dad had a hair cutting machine – a nickel-plated animal with two horns.
Or rather they were two slender handles.
Dad took them both in one hand and put the machine in motion by squeezing and loosening his grip on the handles.
On the day of a haircut, my brother and I were in turn seated in the middle of the kitchen on a stool placed on a chair so that we would sit higher and Dad wouldn't have to stoop down to us. 
Mom tightly wound a white bed sheet around the neck of her son—whose turn it was—and fixed the sheet with a clothespin.
Then she held a large square mirror in front of the brothers, in turn, and shared her advice to Dad.
And Dad waved away the advice with his nose because his right hand was busy with the machine and with his left hand he held the customer’s head and turned it from side to side, and forward, and back.
And even his jaw was busy moving from side to side in time with the clicking of the handles in his palm.
Sometimes the machine did not cut the hair but pulled it. 
It hurt.
At such moments Dad gave an angry snort and sharply blew in the machine in his hand, and then went on with his work.

Once the blowing didn’t bring the machine to order and it continued to pull the hair and Sasha started to cry.
Since that day we visited the hairdresser salon not just before the school was starting after summer but whenever Mom decided that we had become too shaggy. 

Dad learned photography himself from a thick book.
His camera FED-2 was fixed inside its leather brown case which had a narrow shoulder strap of leather also.
When shooting, you had to unbutton the case from behind take pictures with the case's face hanging under the camera then close it back again. 
The camera was unscrewed from the case only to change the cassette with the film after all its thirty-six frames were clicked. 
Then the film was rewind, in the complete darkness, from its cassette into a small round cistern with the tight fitting lid to be treated with the developer solution.
After five minutes the solution was poured out, the film washed with water and treated with the fixing solution then washed once again.
For drying the film was pinned on a rope like a laundry.
But if before that final washing the film had been exposed to the tiniest beam of light it would be spoiled and instead of frames, you’d have just a gleaming black ribbon of a film, a throwaway.

When there collected several developed films, Dad arranged a photo lab in the bathroom.
He covered the bath with two shields of planks he made for the purpose.
They served as the desk on which he put photo projector with its lenses looking down.
In the photo lab, Dad used a special red lamp, because of the photo paper's sensitivity and only the red light didn't spoil it. 

And even in the projector, there was a movable light filter of red glass,  just below the lens, so that light-sensitive photo paper would not become a throwaway while you're adjusting the image sharpness with the lens.
All images in the film were negative: black faces with white lips and eye sockets, and the hair was also white.
After the sharpness adjustment, the red filter was turned aside so that full light from the projector would pour through the film onto the paper and Dad would count down the seconds of the exposure and then turn the filter back in its place. 

Then the still white sheet of paper from under the projector was put into a small plastic bath filled with the developer solution set close to the red light lamp unable to disperse the black darkness in the room which was not a room already but a sorcerer’s chamber.
And then the magic started – under the dim light of the red lantern on a clean white sheet, there gradually appeared clothes, hair, facial features. 
The pictures should not stay in the developer for too long or their paper would turn into black wet squares.
They were taken out with the pincers, rinsed in plain water and placed in the next small bath with the fixer, otherwise, they would blacken all the same; then, after five to ten minutes, the ready pictures were transferred into a large basin with water. 

When the printing was over, Dad turned the light in the bathroom on.
The charmer’s chamber disappeared giving way to a small workshop.
Dad took the wet pictures from the basin, put them face down on Plexiglas sheets and ran rubber roller over their backs so that they stuck well.
Those glasses he put against the wall in the parents’ room and the next day the dried-up photos fell off to the floor as leaves in autumn, but white, smooth and glossy.

Here am I with round eyes and the neck bandaged because of a sore throat. 

Brother Sasha looking so credulously into the camera. 

Mom alone, or with her friends, or with the neighbors.

And that is Natasha with her nose up in the air and the eyes on something else happening to the right and the ribbon in her braid has gotten loose, of course...

Besides the photography, Dad also was a radio fan, that’s why he subscribed The Radio magazine with all kinds of charts.
I liked the smell of melted rosin in the kitchen where he worked with his soldering iron collecting this or that scheme from The Radio.
One time he assembled a radio receiver the size a bit more than the FED-2 camera case.
At first, it was a thin brown board with radio parts soldered to it, then he made a small box of plywood, polished and lacquered it and hid the board inside.
There were just two knobs on the box's face: for adjusting the volume and finding a radio station. 
Then he sewed the case for the receiver from thin leather because he could work with the awl and knew how to make a stitching thread from a usual one rubbing it with wax and pitch.
Finally, he attached a narrow shoulder strap to the case so that you could carry it and still have your hands free.
Later on, he made a special machine on a stool to do bookbinding and bound his radio magazines into volumes – one for each year. 
He had just golden hands.

And Mom, of course, had golden hands too because she cooked tasty meals, sewed with her Singer machine and once a week did a general washing in the washing machine "Oka". 
At times she trusted me with squeezing the water out of the washing by turning the crank of the rubber rollers fixed on top of the machine.
You stick a corner of a washed thing in between the rollers, turn the crank and they pull it in squeezing brooks of water back into the machine basin.
And the thing crawls out behind the rollers thinly pressed and wrung out.

But hanging the washed things was a job for adults because there were no linen ropes in the courtyard and everybody dried their washing in the attics of the houses. 
Only Dad could lift a heavy basin with half wet things up the vertical iron ladder through the hatch above the landing.

Yet one time he, with his golden hands, created a long-term problem for himself.
It’s when he made a ‘bug’ in the electric meter so that it would not rotate even with all the lights on and the washing machine buzzing busily in the bathroom.
Dad said it was for the sake of saving but he was worried and afraid that they would catch us and fine.
Why torment yourself so much because of some savings?

But my Mom remains irreproachable, except for those yellow corduroy shorts with suspenders that she sewed for me in the kindergarten.
I really hated them.
And as it turned out not for naught – it was in those shorts that the red ants had so severely bitten me... 

During one of my solo forest walks I went out into a glade and felt there was something wrong with it, yet what?
Aha! That thin smoke did not belong to the usual picture.
And then I saw flames, almost transparent in the sunlight, fluttering, charring the bark of trees and creeping along the thick carpet of dry pine needles on the ground.
So, the forest’s on fire!
At first, I tried to just trample out the flames on the needles but it did not work. 
Only the broken off trunk of a juniper with lots of dense branches could suppress the flames. 
And it served me also to kill the fire on the trees. 

When the fight with the fire ended victoriously, I saw that the burned-out area was not so big: some ten to ten meters. 
My shirt and hands were smeared with black soot.
I didn’t mind because the battle dirt is not dirty.
More than that, I even ran my sooty hand over my face to smear it too that everyone could see – that's the hero who saved the forest from the death in the fire. 
Unfortunately, I met no one on the way home.
Walking I dreamed of being written about in The Pioneer Pravda, where they published an article about a pioneer who signaled with his red tie to the locomotive driver about the broken railway. 

Already entering the courtyard I met at last two passers-by.
They looked at me but none of them asked:
‘Where's this black soot in your face from? It seems you were quenching a forest fire, weren't you?' 
At home, Mom yelled at me for going around so dirty and no washing machine would catch up with keeping my shirts clean. 
I felt hurt but suffered it silently.

In summer evenings the children of the Block and mothers of those kids who were yet to be looked after went out of the courtyard on the surrounding road of concrete.
They were waiting for the platoon from the Recruit Depot Barracks to come up to the road to drill their evening promenade.
On reaching the concrete surface of the road they started to parade march. 
As in a magic transformation, they seemed to merge into a united creature—a closed squad—that had one leg all the length of the marching flank, fused of dozens of black boots that simultaneously broke away from the road and fell down one step further advancing the whole formation farther for that one step. 
It looked so fascinating a creature! 

Then the sergeant-major walking along by its side abruptly commanded:
‘Sing off!’
And from the midst of the compact mass throbbing in time to the mutual ‘plonk!’ of the boot soles against the concrete, a young vibrating tenor rose solo to be followed in a few steps further by the thunder of the supporting chorus:

...we are the paratroopers,
   the wide sky is all for us... 

The formation went on and on to the corner of the next block with its inhabitants waiting for it to march by and some children from ours followed it as a running tail and the young mothers looked in the wake of the marching soldiers.
And the all-embracing serenity permeated the evening because we were the strongest and so reliably protected by our paratroopers from all the NATO spies in the anteroom of the Detachment Library...

They brought long iron pipes into the courtyard. 
If you hit such a pipe with a stick it would ring loudly and longly.
I didn't care about lengthening the sound, all I wanted was to repeat the drum roll with which the Whites went with a ‘psychic' attack against Anka the machine gunner in the movies ‘Chapaev'. 
Day after day coming from school I tried and tried filling the courtyard with ding and dong – no go, nothing like that roll.
The pipes were buried too soon and my musical self-education got interrupted…

The blocks of the Gorka got furnished with gas.
They installed the gas stove was in the kitchen hanged the white box on the wall to light the gas when heating water to wash up or take a bath. 
Titan the Boiler disappeared from the bathroom and firewood was needed no more. 
Our basement section with Dad's workshop became roomier...

One day in the early summer when the parents were at work I came down to our basement section and took away Dad’s big ax because I and some other boy wanted to make a fire in the forest.
We descended into the thicket behind the Bugorok-Knoll and started to climb up another hill,
On the steep slope there stood a small fir tree about a meter and a half.
From the moment of entering the forest with the ax in my hands, I had had an overwhelming desire to put it to use.
And there it stood before me the one and a half meter opportunity.
One or two strokes and the fir tree was lying on the slope.
And I stood by it and could not understand what for?
You couldn't use it for making a bow nor even for a fake Kalashnikov gun to play ‘War-Mommy'. 
Why did I kill the fir so aimlessly?
I no longer wanted to make any fire or have a walk.

I needed as soon as possible get rid of the ax – the accomplice in my stupid cruelty.
I took it back to the basement section and from that time went to the forest unarmed...

(...see? Such a prissy charming boy.
But the core of this pathetic self-praise through self-chastening is, actually, true.
However, don’t hurry to enter your Daddy in the ‘good men’ list.
I am too unstable for that.
Today I’m as tenderhearted as you can wish, but tomorrow…
Well, I don’t know.

When my bachnagh (this word in Karabakh Armenian means ‘husband of sister-in-law’) was preparing the wedding of his eldest daughter the relatives were helping with all they could.
Not with money though because he wouldn’t accept it – the expenses for such an occasion are born by the happy father.
That's the tradition.
The acceptable help comprises, mainly, cookery work.
The standard set of core wedding treats at the city House of Celebrations is paid in cash, but the standard is diversified by lots of additions cooked by aunts, grandmothers, mothers, sisters, daughters of the immediate and distant relatives.
Kinship, aka clan relationships, are verily alive and kicking in Karabakh.
The culinary help in wedding preparations is sort of love labor using the products purchased by the celebration organizer.
However, some products need certain preliminary treatment and you can't deny that slaughtering a dozen of chickens on the balcony in a five-story building is a somewhat more complicated action than in not-finished-yet but still a private house. 
That’s why the chickens were brought to me.

They dumped them in the unfinished hallway and left, busy with other innumerable other wedding-preparatory charges. 
Jedem – seiner, as a German saying runs.
So those fifteen living creatures are lying on the dusty ground with their legs tied and I am towering above them with a freshly whetted knife in my hand and we all know what we are there for.
Fifteen is not just one and there is the deadline when kinswomen come to pluck the initially processed products.
And each of the future products is still alive, having its own coloring, its age, its point of view on what is happening, its individual reserve of energy, which determines the loudness of the protestations and protraction of the flutter with the head chopped off.
You can’t do the job without being methodical.
So I turned into a robot methodically repeating a set of the same movements.
Fifteen times…
Sometimes I looked through the window opening without a frame on a white cloud high in the blue sky. 
So clean. 
Immaculate. 
Fluffy…
That’s a robot with a sentimental wrinkle in its program for you.
Since that time my attitude to executioners has somehow changed.
Maybe, I understood that nothing of theirs was alien to me.
Well, in nutshell, at that wedding I was a vegetarian.

As for the assertion that in the case of the fir tree it all was the guilt of the ax pressing me into slaughter of the innocent plant, there’s nothing new about it:
‘I was carrying out the orders...’
Zombie-simulation…)

In the fifth grade, we had a new teacher because our elementary education was over. 
The new teacher's name was Makarenko Lyubov … er… Alexeevna?. Antonovna?. 
I don’t remember her patronymic.
Between us, we called her just ‘Makar'. 
‘Atas! Makar is coming!' 
(In the school lingo ‘atas’ meant ‘beware’.)

But that was later and for the first time, I met the would-be class mistress the day before school, when Mom came with me to find out the curriculum and to get acquainted with my new teacher. 
The new teacher asked me to help her with the class wall newspaper on a big sheet of Whatman paper. 
It had to have a frame as marked with a pencil line five-centimeter offset from the edges.
She gave me a brush and a box of watercolors—but use only the blue one!—and went out together with my Mom to go on with their acquaintance.

Proud to be trusted with the job, I started immediately.
I dipped the brush in the glass of water, dampened the blue and began to paint the strip of the Whatman paper between its edge and the pencil mark trying not to trespass it. 
It turned to be an up-hill job – you paint, and paint, and paint and there still remains so much to paint yet.
And the main problem that the watercolor could not be laid uniformly – each stroke lighter or darker than another. 
But I persevered – not every day a boy is trusted with making frames on a sheet of Whatman. 

By return of Mom and the teacher, I had only painted a quarter of the frame. 
The teacher said at once that was enough even more than that because all she had wanted was that I just passed the brush along the pencil line, but now it's too late. 
Mom promised to bring a sheet of Whatman paper from her work, but the teacher said ‘no-no!’
I came up with a proposal to mount strips of paper on glue over the superfluously painted areas, but it was turned down I don’t know why.

We left and Mom did not rebuke me on our way home.
Actually, it's not my fault if the new teacher had never in her life seen a frame of plywood but only such as around the words of Marx and Lenin in the Regiment Club. 
When school began there was a wall newspaper in our classroom.
Probably, I was the only schoolboy who studied the paper’s blue frame for so long...

However, our new teacher still had some confidence in me because a month later she sent me to our former class with a verbal message to Seraphima Sergeevna.
I knocked on the familiar door and recited the message to my first teacher who was sitting at her desk facing a new growth of first graders.
She thanked me and asked to close the window leaf which let drought in when they opened the door.
I readily climbed onto the windowsill and, standing on it, reached out and slammed shut the vicious window leaf.
For coming back, instead of kneeling on the sill then lying on it with the stomach, I just jumped down on the floor. 
The jump turned out really deft and I strutted out of the silent classroom past the delight and reverence in the eyes of the small ones at their desks.

How could I have thought those first-graders on a visit to my kindergarten group were so unreachable grown up?
Arrogant swaggers!

And at home, we had already a TV set. 
The announcers read the news from it against the background of the Kremlin walls and towers, the hockey players rushed from one goal to the other at the European and World Championships. 
There were eagerly awaited for programs of Kinopanorama and the Club of Jolly and Inventive, and, of course, movies!
I would never have thought that there could be a film longer than of two sequels.
Four-sequel serial "Bombard the area I'm in!" became an eye-opener. 
Only I did not like Italian cinema because when Marcello Mastroianni talked about abortion and I asked what that word meant our neighbor aunt Polinna laughed and my Dad told me to go to the children's room – that movie was not for me... 

The arms race went on not only in TV news broadcasting but also in our boyish life.
We grew up to use the crook weaponry. 
Crook pistols, crook guns.
There’s any need for explanations what a slingshot is.
However, there are two types of slingshots: for shooting pebbles, and for shooting crooks. 

(...pebble-shooters are the mortal weapon, in the hungry post-war years in Stepanakert, the boys were knocking sparrows from the trees for their meal…) 

Crook-shooting slingshot is almost a toy made of aluminum wire and aircraft-model round rubber band (instead of rubber straps cut out from a gas mask).
Such slingshots are charged with small pieces of aluminum wire bent into narrow arcs – crooks.
Catch the rubber band into the crook, pull and let it fly.
The crook doesn't kill but it is felt alright. 
Bad news if it hits an eye. 

Now, if instead of the slingshot the round rubber band is fixed upon the planed piece of plank and the crook is pulled along the even surface, the accuracy of the hit is much greater because the released crook takes off the planed guide.
The rest is at your discretion – whether to cut out a submachine gun or a pistol from that piece of plank.
At the point on the plank to which the crook is pulled, you adjust the trigger from the same aluminum wire which is strung crosswise and keeps the crook in place until you pull the trigger.
The pressure for keeping originates from an underpants rubber stretched tightly between the trigger and the screw in the plank.

Those armed with such weapons do not run and cry ‘ta-ta-ta!’ as in the ‘War-Mommy’. 
Noup.
They go down into the basements and start to hunt with it each other in in the dark or semi-darkness. 
Metallic ‘dzink!’ of a crook against the cement floor or wall suggests that the enemy is near and opened fire at you.
But if you occupied the position in the pit above the floor at the end of the corridor, it’s almost an impregnable bunker.
You have just to sit there tight and send crooks to the sound of stealthy steps and if you hear ‘ouch!' from the dark then you have targeted him Okay. 

In autumn they finished construction of the five-story building across the road surrounding the Block.
The tenants were moving into their flats while deep down, in the endless basement corridors of so big a building (the first of that height and size at the Object) there unfolded unprecedented combat actions with employment of crook weapons of all types.
The underground basement was lit with rare electric bulbs but not for long: long-range crook shots burst them, up one by one, into fine splinters. 
Perhaps, the only drawback of the crook weapons was their almost complete noiselessness.
For real self-assertion, you need your arms to do some major bangs... 

Life does not stand still it just had to flow. 
Where to? 
The direction is decided by customer's wish expressed in their dreams. 

The evening quietude of the courtyard began more and more oftener get disrupt by sharp reports alike to firearms shots.
The boys had armed themselves with ‘peelikkalkas' and I, as usual, lagging behind the flow of social life had to unctuously inquire how to make a ‘peelikkalka'. 

15 cm length of a narrow (0.5 cm) copper tube is bent in the shape of letter ‘L’.
The foot of the ‘L' is flattened with a hammer. 
A small amount of molten lead is poured into the tube through the remaining orifice to form a smooth leaden bottom at the bend point.
Find a thick long nail reaching the leaden bottom and still sticking out from the tube for at least 5 cm.
Bend the nail at 4 cm from its head (you’ve got another ‘L’ now).
Insert the nail into the tube (the contraption resembles the left bracket ‘[‘, or right bracket ‘]', depending on your point of view) and as a result, you have a working piston-cylinder system. 
Connect the bent nail head and the flattened tube foot by means of an underpants rubber band; the whole construction looks like a small bow and your ‘peelikkalka is ready.
Pull the nail halfway from the tube, the tension of the band forces the nail rest against the copper wall of the tube at the point to which you pulled the nail out. 
Squeeze the ‘peelikkalka in your palm, the band pressed to the tube makes the nail slide inside and sharply hit the leaden bottom.
A blank shot is done. 
It remains only to load the firearms for which purpose the nail is fully taken out and the tube loaded with scrapings of sulfur from a pair of matches heads. 
Insert the nail back, cock it up with the band and ‘Hello, world!’ with a live shot from your weapon.
Bang!
In the dark of evening, a splash of flame shoots out from the tube. 
On the whole, it's the same principle as in toy pistols with paper pistons but with the much more impressive result. 

After learning theory, I wanted to make a 'peelikkalka' of my own but Dad did not have a copper tube of the right size at his work.
Yet and still I had it. 
Probably, one of the boys gave me an odd one of his.

Yes, being a schoolboy you get a real schooling for life…

And at school, our class was moved to a one-story building in the lower part of the school grounds, about a hundred meters from the main school building. 
Apart from our classroom, there was only workshop room for Handicraft lessons with rows of vices and even a lathe. 
But that room was rarely open, two or three days a week. 

Learning at the outskirts of the school grounds had lots of advantages.
During the breaks you could have mad runs in the corridor without the risk of stumbling into a teacher – they were patrolling only the main building.
The teachers entered our class after our sentinel posted at the building corner would announce which subject was heading to us from up there.
The look-out guard was the must to not be caught at bullying the socket on the classroom wall.
We thrust the legs of radio-electronic resistances into the holes of the mains.
In the resulting short circuit, the melting resistance spat indignantly with large sparks of flame. 

(...now I'm just wondering why none of us had ever got electroshocked. 
Perhaps, it was a very kind wall socket in that room…)

There were changes in our house too.
The Zimin family had left because Stepan Zimin was made redundant.
Nikita Khrushchev, when being the main ruler of the USSR, promised the West to cut the contingent of the Soviet Army to meager twenty million of servicemen. 
Soon after that, he was made to retire but the new ruler kept the promise of the previous one.
The reduction of personnel touched even the Object.

In addition to the Zimins, the tenants from the apartment beneath us also left. 
Their grown-up daughter Julia left us, three children from the upper floor, her album with the collection of matchbox stickers.
At those times matchboxes were made not of cardboard with printed pictures on it but of very thin one-layer plywood.
The matchbox then was cover with thin blue paper and on top of it, they mounted a sticker with Ulanova the ballet dancer, or some sea animal, or the portrait of an astronaut. 
People collected matchbox stickers just like the post stamps.
Only first, they should be peeled off a box soaked in water and then, of course, dried. 

Julia's collection was subdivided into sections: sports, aviation, Hero Cities, and so on. 
Of course, we three were delighted with so generous a gift and continued the collection... 

Instead of Yura Zimin another Yura became my friend and with another second name.
Yura Nikolaenko was also a neighbor but more distant – not from the same landing, yet from the same courtyard.
As the snow filled the forest we went there to search for foxholes, or at least to catch a hare.
We had good chances for the success because together with us went a 'lowlander' boy who lived in a wooden house and had a dog.
He yanked the reluctant dog with a linen rope tied at its collar.
In the forest, though, the dog started to drag him forward and backward over the snowdrifts with lots of hare footprints.
Yura and I were running behind not to miss out on the moment of catching a hare. 
Then we noticed that the dog was paying no attention to the hare footprints but constantly sniffing for something else.
Finally, it started to dig a high snow drift. 
Anticipating that it would dig out a fox burrow, we armed ourselves with sticks against the beast.
However, from under the snow, the dog pulled out a big old bone and we stopped hunting...

During the winter holidays, many children of my age were invited to a neighboring corner house in the courtyard where some newly arrived tenants celebrated the birthday of their daughter, my future classmate. 
She looked like Malvina from the Golden Key tale, only her hair was not blue and curly but straight.
At the table, the beautiful girl shared her memories that at the place where they lived before she was the Queen of the Courtyard and the boys thereof were her, sort of, pages... 


Probably, I caught a cold at the holidays and started school later than my classmates because I could not understand what was happening that morning when I finally came to class.
Lessons had not begun yet and after me, the newcomer Malvina-like girl appeared at the door. 
Like the rest of the schoolgirls, she wore the uniform of Queen Victoria style: a brown dress with a white lace collar and a black apron with lush straps on her shoulders.
Stepping over the threshold she stopped and waited expectantly.
The next moment there sounded a multi-voiced cry:
‘The Cow of the Courtyard!’
She dropped her schoolbag on the floor and, wrapping her arms around her head ran along the aisle between the desks and everyone—the boys and the girls—blocked her way, hooting and yelling something in her ears and Yura Nikolaenko ran behind her and rubbed himself at her back like dogs do until she sat down at her desk and hid her face in her hands.
The mayhem ceased only when a teacher entered the classroom with a question;
‘What’s going on here?’
She was as perplexed as me. 
The girl ran out of the classroom without even picking her school bag up from the floor.

The next day we had a class meeting but without that girl.
Instead of her Dad came to the meeting with a red face and shouted that we were rascals and pinched his daughter by the chest.
He demonstrated with his hands the way we had been doing it.
Then the teacher spoke to the meeting that it’s a disgrace for pioneers to goad their classmate as that, and she's also a pioneer like us.
And I felt ashamed even though I hadn't pinched nor goaded anyone. 

The beautiful girl never more came to our class.
Perhaps, she was transferred to the parallel one.

(...the crowd is a merciless beast wrote Avetic Isahakian in his poem about Abu-Lala, but I had seen it before I read it…)

Individual cruelty is not any better than a collective one.
In spring I got another deep scratch witnessing an example of maternal pedagogy in the courtyard.
The afternoon Courtyard was empty when a woman entered it between the corner and our houses heading for the opposite side of the courtyard.
Behind her a six-year-old girl ran wailing with her arm outstretched to the women and repeated the same words with hoarse from wailing and crying voice:
‘Mom, gimme your hand! Mom, gimme your hand!’
Something in that hoarse cry reminded me of Masha’s screeching when they came to slaughter her at Grandma Katya’s in Konotop.
The woman walked on without stopping only at times turned back and with a thin rod whipped the hand pleadingly stretched to her.
The girl wailed louder but did not take away her hand and did not stop crying: 
‘Mom, gimme your hand!’

They crossed the yard and went into their entrance leaving me beset with the unanswerable question – how could such fascist mothers exist in our country?.

Between the left wing of the school building and the high plank fence which separated the school grounds from the surrounding forest, there were beds of the school agronomy lot. 
It’s highly unlikely that the loam mixed with withered pine needles from the rare pines left inside the school territory was capable of yielding any sort of crop.
However, when they announced in the classroom that everyone should come on Sunday to dig up the beds in the school lot I was at school at the appointed hour.
The morning was overcast and Mom discouraged me from going.
Everything turned out just the way she had predicted: not a single soul around.
But maybe they would come?

I didn’t want to loaf by the locked school or hang around at the agronomy lot and I went down to the one-story building of the workshop and our class in the lower part of the school grounds.
Opposite the entrance to the locked building, there was a squat brick warehouse with two gates locked as well. 
However, it turned out that it’s not a big deal to climb up to its roof from a close slope of a steep hillock behind it.
An empty slightly sloping lean-to roof was covered with black roofing felt.
I went around the roof to each of its corners.
Looked back at the empty silent school.
No one.
Five minutes more and I’d go home.

Then the sun shot through the clouds and the waiting became not so gloomy.
Because of I noticed that from the black roof here and there were rising light transparent wisps of steam. 
‘Aha, the sun heat!’ figured I out.
What's more, there began to appear dark-gray color dry streaks on the black felt.
They widened, expanded, joined together.
I was entranced by that expansion of solar possessions.
I knew that no one would show up and I could just leave and go.
Yet, let that stretch of wet roof felt turn dry-gray too so that the island of dry would reach the very edge of the roof. 
I returned home by the midday meal time and didn’t explain to Mom that the sun recruited me to its companions in arms...

End spring Dad was going fishing out of the Zone and he agreed to take me with him if I dug out worms for bait.
I knew some good places for worm-digging and prepared a whole tangle of them; half of a tin can. 
We left very early in the morning and near the Checkpoint were joined by two more men with the same papers of permission to leave the Zone for a whole day till six in the evening.

Beyond the white Checkpoint gate, we turned right and went through the forest. 
We were walking and walking, and walking and the forest never ended.
At times the tread-path we were walking along got near the edge of the forest but then again turned into the wilderness.
I walked patiently because Dad had warned me in advance that we should go eight kilometers and I answered it was Okay with me, I’d do that.
So I walked, though my fishing pole and the tin can with bait grew very heavy. 
Finally, we went out to a forest lake and the fishermen told it was Sominsky.
I didn’t recognize the lake though it was in it that I once learned to swim.

We walked along a grassy promontory at the end of which there was a real raft.
One of the fishermen remained on shore and we three boarded the raft.
It was made of logs from deciduous trees in a thin green bark. 
Dad and the other fisherman pushed the raft off and shoving the lake bottom with long poles took it some thirty meters away from the shore.
There we stopped and began fishing.
The raft logs were not very close to each other and in the gaps between them, there were seen the traverse logs drowned in the pitch black depth, so we had to be careful. 

We were fishing with our fishing poles directed in three different sides from the raft.
The catch was not so big as you would think considering their resistance when you were pulling your fishing pole, and around their muzzles and on backs there stuck out prickly spikes.
Dad said it's the ruff, and the fisherman added that the most delicious fish soup is cooked of them. 
Later, when we got ashore and cooked the soup in a pot hanging over the fire I ate all of it, of course, but couldn’t decide how delicious it was: the soup was a bit too steamy and hot.
The fishermen said there was no prospect of good catch anymore because at that time of the day fish is sleeping.
They went under the trees and slept too, the fishermen and my Dad.
When everyone woke up we slowly started back home. 

Returning, we didn't take the shortcut tread-path through the forest, we walked along the hills and valleys because the papers permitted be away till evening. 
From the top of one of the hills, we saw a lake in the distance, a perfectly round lake overgrown with reeds. 
We proceeded to it and Dad wanted, at any rate, to take a swim in it. 
One fisherman tried to talk him out of the idea.
The round lake, called the Witch’s eye, time and again had someone drown in its duckweed.
But Dad doffed his clothes, all the same, grabbed hold of the stern of a small boat near the shore and kicking up foamy splashes went off to the opposite one. 
Halfway through, he remembered the watch on his wrist, took it off and hung on a nail in the stern. 
When he came back long wisps of duckweed were thickly stuck onto his shoulders. 
When he already was on the shore and putting on his clothes, we saw a woman in a long skirt of village women running across the slanted field with unclear yells. 
She ran up to us but didn’t say anything new, just repeated what we had heard from the fellow-fisherman.
Near the Checkpoint, we got in a bad weather and got thoroughly wet while we got home but no one fell ill after that... 

With bicycles, I have a friendship since my childhood. 
I can't even remotely remember my first tricycle but some photos confirm: here it is with the pedals on the front wheel and me in its saddle, a three-year-old fat little man in a closely fitting skull cap. 
Yet, I recollect the next one – a red three-wheeler with the chain drive because I often had to argue with my brother and sister whose turn it was to ride it. 
Later, Dad reassembled it into a two-wheeler but after my fifth grade, it became too small for me to ride and irrevocably went over to the younger ones. 

Then my Dad got somewhere a real bike for adults. 
Yes, it was a second-hand one, but not a bike for ladies or some kind of ‘Eaglet’ for grown-up kids.
One evening after his work, Dad even tried to teach me riding it, but without his supporting hand on the saddle, I would fall on one side or the other. 
Dad got tired of my clumsiness and said ‘Learn it yourself!’

In a couple of days, I could already ride it. 
However, I didn't get the nerve to throw my leg over and sit on its saddle, I just passed my leg through the frame and rode it standing on its pedals which caused the bike to run askew. 
But then I got ashamed seeing a boy, even younger than me, who was not afraid to run along with one foot put on his bike’s pedal and then flung the other foot over the saddle to the other pedal.
He lacked the length of legs to sit up on the saddle and not to lose the pedals. 
So he rode sitting on the frame with his left then right thigh, alternatively. 
Next to that small but brave kid, riding the bike ‘under the frame’ was just a shame.

And now, finally, after so many tries and falls ending both with bruises and without, I did it! 

Wow! How swiftly the bike carried me over the ground – no one would catch up even if running.
And most important – how easy it was to ride a bicycle!

I could drive for hours along the concrete paths in the courtyard, orbiting its two wooden gazebos.
When it ceased to satisfy anymore, I started to ride along the road of concrete slabs surrounding the two Blocks. 
At higher speeds, the mastering of bike aerobatics began: ‘riding without the handles’, when you take your hands off the steer and pilot the bicycle by feeding your body weight to either side.
And the bike understood!

Another achievement of that summer was developing the ability to open eyes under water. 
The dam where I once slipped off the slab was repaired again producing a wide bathing pool. 
We, boys, played ‘spotting’ in the water when the ‘it’ had to catch up and touch one of the players.
And because the game took place in the water both running away and catching was done by diving.
Underwater, you could change the dive direction and who knows where you’d come up out to the surface.
Before, I always firmly closed my eyes when diving but only with open eyes you could see flashing of white heels of a player.

Under the water, in its yellowish twilight, you can see not very far, but the sounds are heard much more clearly, if, say, you sit underwater and knock two pebbles against each other. 
However, you cannot sit there for a long time – the air in your lungs drags you up to the surface when you do not row your hand and legs into the depth...

That summer my parents went on their vacations in turn. 
First, Dad went to his native village of Kanino in the Ryazan region. 
He took me with him only warned that on the way I did not tell anyone anywhere that we lived at the Atomic Object.

At the station of Bologoye, we had a long wait for the train to Moscow.
Dad went to punch the tickets and I remained sitting on our suitcase in the station waiting room.
On a nearby bench, a girl was sitting with an open book in her lap. 
I walked up to the girl and looked over her shoulder.
It was "The Mysterious Island" by Jules Verne.
I read a couple of paragraphs of the familiar lines I liked so much.
She also read without paying any attention to me standing behind the bench.
I wanted to talk to her, but I did not know what to say.
That that was a good book? That I had also read it?

While I was looking for the right words to say, her adults came and announced that their train was arriving.
They grabbed their things and went out to the platform to board the train.
She never looked back.
Then my Dad returned with the punched tickets.
At my request, he bought me a book from a bookstall about a Hungarian boy who later became a youth and fought against the Austrian invaders of his homeland. 

When the ping-pong echo of the loudspeaker announced the arrival of our train, we went out to the platform. 
A boy about ten-years-old passed by.
‘See? Еhat’s the poverty.’ said Dad to me.
I looked at the boy going away and noticed the rough patches in his pants. 

In Moscow, we arrived in the morning. 
I kept asking when there would be Moscow until the conductor said that we were already in the city.
But behind the window pane of the car, there were the same shabby log huts as at the stations of Valdai, only much more and closer to each other and they did not want to end in any way. 
And only when our train pulled in under the high roof of the station I believed that it was Moscow.

We went on foot to the other station which was very close.
There Dad again punched the tickets but that time we had to wait until the evening, so he handed the suitcase over to the storage room and we went to the Kremlin for an excursion.
In the Kremlin, they warned that we shouldn't take pictures there. 
Dad had to show that was not a camera in the leather case hanging from his shoulder but his homemade radio and I was allowed to carry it on.
There were white-walled houses in the Kremlin and dark fir trees, but very few, although thick and high.

The excursion was brought to the Tsar Bell with a chopped out wall.
It happened when the Tsar Bell fell from the bell tower and couldn’t ring ever since.
That’s a pity.
And when they showed us the Tsar Cannon, I instantly climbed the pile of the large polished cannonballs under her nose and shoot my head into the muzzle. 
There was a lot of dust on the circular wall.
‘Whose kid is that?! Take him away!!’
So cried some man in a gray suit running up from the nearest tree.
Dad admitted that I was his and then, until we left the Kremlin, he held me by the hand all the time. 

When we returned to the railway station, Dad said that he needed to buy a watch, only that's a pity he did have money enough.
Nonetheless, we went to the store where there were lots of different watches under the glass in the counter and Dad asked me which one to buy.
I remembered his complaint about the lack of money and pointed at the cheapest - for seven rubles, but Dad bought an expensive one – for twenty-five...

In the village of Kanino, we lived in the log hut of Grandma Martha which consisted of one large room with two windows and a high Russian stove. 
Behind the hut, there was a log lean-to attached to it. 
It was empty, strewn with wisps of old hay and smelled with dust.
In that lean-to, I found three books: a historical novel about Bagration and the war of 1812, a long story about establishing of the Soviet power among the Indians of Chukchi Peninsula, and ‘The Little Prince' by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. 

Once my Dad’s brother and sister came to visit.
They lived in the same village but were very busy at the collective farm, kolkhoz.
Grandma Martha cooked a round yellow omelet for the occasion.
I don’t remember the meals on other days...

The village of Kanino was divided into two parts by the hollow with a broad slow creek.
Its banks were completely overgrown with the willow. 
And the stream was shallow too – just a bit above the knees with a pleasant sandy bottom.
I liked to wander in its slow current.

Once my Dad took me to the Mostya river.
It was a long-long walk but there was enough of the river to swim from one grassy bank to the other.
There were many people on both banks, probably from other villages.

On our way back we saw a combine harvesting wheat in the field.
We stopped at the edge of the field and when the combine drove past to the other end, Dad angrily said ‘hooey!’
It turned out that the combine driver was cutting the very tops of the spikes to finish his job quicker but when he saw a stranger in a white tank shirt together with a boy of urban appearance he decided my Dad was some chief from the district administration on his vacation and, driving past us, he mowed the spikes at their very roots. 

Near the Grandma Martha's lean-to, there appeared a large haystack when Dad and his brother began some small repair inside her log hut. 
Grandma Martha moved to spend nights in the lean-to and for me and my Dad, the bed was made atop of the haystack. 
Sleeping up there was convenient and pleasant because of the withering grass smell but a bit unusual and even scary for all the stars above you all the time.
Besides, the roosters started crying before the dawn and then you had just to lay in the twilight before dropping off again...

One day I went upstream as far as another village and an earthen dam made by the boy from that village so that you could swim. 
But after that, I fell ill and was taken to the same upstream village because only there was infirmary with three beds. 
On one of those, I was ill almost a whole week reading ‘The Standard Bearers' by Gonchar and eating the strawberry jam brought by Dad's sister, Aunt Sasha. 
So we spent Dad’s vocation and returned to the Object.

Soon after our return, Mom took Sasha and Natasha with her and went on her vacation to Konotop.
Again Dad and I remained as a company of two. 
He cooked tasty pasta soup in a Fleet manner and told things about the seamen life.
For instance, on ships, many commands were given by the trumpet signal. 
Those signals were not just ‘du-du-du-du du-du-du-du’ as made by a pioneer bugler when marching together with a drummer after the Pioneer Company Banner on some ceremonial lining-up.
The ship trumpet plays a different melody for each command. 
At midday meal time the trumpet sings:
‘Take your spoon, and your mess-tin run, run, run to the half-deck'.
The mess-tin is a pot with a lid which they fill with the sailor’s meal.
And the half-deck is the place on a ship where the cook ladles meal out.
Dad taught me some sea words.
‘Topmast’ is the highest point on a boat.
When they want to play a trick on a young sailor they give him a teapot and send after tea from the topmast.
The greenhorn, of course, does not know where it is and walks about the ship asking the way.
The seasoned sailors direct him from one place to another or to the engine room, just for fun.

My Dad also told that some zeks who stayed in a zone for many years can no longer to live in freedom.
One recidivist after serving his term asked the Zone Chief not to let him out and keep in the zone. 
But the Zone Chief replied: 
‘The law is the law! Get away!’
In the evening the recidivist was brought back to the zone because he killed a man in a nearby village.
And the murderer cried:
‘I told you, Chief! Because of you, I took an innocent soul!' 
At those words, Dad's eyes looked sideways and up and even his voice changed somehow...

Some books I re-read several times, not immediately, of course, but after some time.
That day I was re-reading the book of stories about the revolutionary Babushkin, which I was awarded at school for good study and active participation in the school public life. 
He was a mere laborer and worked for rich plant owners before he became a revolutionary.

When Dad called me for the midday meal, I went to the kitchen got seated at the table and, eating the soup, said: 
‘And do you know that the workers at Putilov factory once were forced to work for forty hours at a stretch?’
To which my Dad replied:
‘Do you know that your Mom went to Konotop with another man?’
I raised my head from above the plate.
Dad was sitting in front of untouched soup and looking at the kitchen window.
I was scared, I cried and said:
‘I will kill him!’
But Dad still looking at the window answered:
‘No, Seryozha, we don’t need no killing.’
His voice sounded a little nasal as that of the recidivist murderer.

Then Dad got to the Detachment Hospital and for two days the neighbor woman who moved in the flat of the redundant Zimins was coming to our kitchen to cook meals for me.
On the third day, Mom came back together with my sister and brother. 
Mom went to see Dad at the Hospital and took me with her.

Dad came out to the yard in pajamas which they gave to all the patients in Hospital. 
The parents sat on a bench and told me to go and play somewhere.
I walked away but not too far and I heard as Mom was quickly telling something to Dad in a low voice.
He looked straight in front of himself repeating:
‘The kids will understand when grown up.' 

(...when I grew up, I understood that some informer had sent a letter from Konotop, only that time to my Dad instead of the Special Department.
What for?
Telling on my Mom gave the rat no prospect of getting better housing conditions or other improvements in their day to day life. 
Or maybe just out of habit?
Or maybe that was not a neighbor at all? 
Some people when not happy with their lives think it will help if someone else does badly.
I do not think it works but I know that there are such thinkers.

I never asked my brother and sister about the man who went with them to Konotop that summer.
Nonetheless, now I know that it was so. 

Mom built her defense on Dad’s frivolous behavior during his vacation the previous year when he went alone to a Crimean sanatorium on the admission card from the Trade Union.
He got so light-minded there that never thought to get rid of his light-mindedness evidence and Mom had to wash that evidence out from his underwear in the washing machine ‘Oka’…

Then Dad left the Hospital and we started to live on…)

At school, our sixth form was moved back onto the second floor of the main building.
With reading books and watching the television I had no time for home assignments but still remained a ‘good learner' just out of inertia. 
In the public life, I played the role of a horse in the performance staged by the pioneers of our school.
I got that role because Dad made a big horse head from cardboard and on stage I represented the horse's head and forelegs.
My hands and shoulders were concealed by a large colorful shawl under which there was one more boy in a deep bow position grasping my belt from behind who played the role of the hinder-parts.

The horse in the scene did not say anything and appeared in the dream of the sleeping idler only to intimidate him so that he began to study well.
We performed in the school gym, and in the Regiment Club, and even went on a tour out of the Zone – to the village club of Pistovo. 
The appearance of the horse everywhere sparked vivacity among the audience...

Besides the movies at the Regiment Club, I sometimes went to the House of Officers – my parents gave me money for a ticket.
It was there that I first watched the French adaptation of The Three Musketeers.
A thick crowd gathered in the vestibule in front of the auditorium before the film.
Bad rumors circulated among the people.
That the film was not brought and they would show something different instead so that not to lose sold tickets.
On the wall of the vestibule there hung a huge portrait of Marshal Malinovsky with all his orders and medals on.
There were so many of them, no free space left on the tunic – the awards like an all-over coat of mail hung down even below the belt. 
Looking at the chain-mailed marshal, I thought that I wouldn’t watch anything else, although the money for the ticket was already given.
But the alarm turned out to be false and the happiness lasted, under the ringing sounds of swords, the whole two sequels, in color!.. 

Exploration of the Detachment Library developed successfully.
Not only that I had long ceased to get frightened by the pictures in the wide hallway, I became a real shelf-hanger.
As the shelving of books crowded quite close, I got the hang of climbing to the very top putting my feet on the shelves both sides of the narrow passages.
I wouldn't say that on the previously unreachable shelves there were some special books, no; however, the acquired skills of mountaineering increased my self-esteem. 

I felt the same when Natasha called me to distract from sofa-readings because there was an owl in the basement of the corner building.
Of course, I immediately ran after her.
The basement corridor was illuminated by a single bulb that survived the harsh times of the crook wars.
At the end of the corridor under the opening to the outer pit there sat a large bird on the floor – much bigger than an owl. 
Some real eagle owl.
He shook his eared head with the crooked nose.
No wonder that the kids did not dare to approach. 

I acted without a moment’s hesitation or thinking it over as if I encountered eagle owl every other day.
I took off my shirt and threw it over the bird’s head.
Then I grasped its clawed legs and lifted it from the floor.
The owl didn’t resist under the cover of my tartan shirt.
Where to now?
Of course, I took it home, especially since I was not fully clad. 

Mom didn’t agree to keep such a big monster at home although our neighbors the Savkins had a hefty crow in their flat.
Mom answered that Grandmother Savkin's main preoccupation was all day to wipe up crow guano all over their flat. 
And who would do it in ours when all of us were at work and at school? 
Reluctantly, I promised the next morning to take the eagle owl to the Living Nature Room at the school where a squirrel and a hedgehog lived in their cages. 
Meanwhile, let him sit in the bathroom.

For the eagle owl's refreshment, I took to the bathroom a crust of bread and a saucer filled with milk. 
He sat in the corner on the tiled floor and did not even look at the food.
Going out I turned off the light, hoping that he would find it in the dark because it's a night predator. 
In the morning I saw that the eagle owl did not touch anything of his supper.
After breakfast, I gripped his bare legs and carried him to school.

Probably, owls do not like hanging upside down because that eagle owl all the way tried to bend his head up as far as the neck let go.
Sometimes I gave my schoolbag to my brother and carried the bird with my both hands in the normal position.

When the distant view of the school opened from the hillocks top, the owl's head dropped and I realized that he was dead. 
I felt even relieved that he wouldn’t have to live in the captivity of smelly Living Nature Room.
I left the path and hid him in the bushes because once I saw a hawk hanged from a thick bough of the old tree on the Bugorok-Knoll.
I didn’t want they feathered or somehow mutilate my owl even dead as he was...
Later Mom said that probably he died of old age that’s why he got to the basement.


(...but I think all that happened so that we would have met each other.
He was a messenger to me, only that I haven’t yet understood the message.
Birds are not just birds and ancient augurs knew that…

My house in Stepanakert is located on the slope of a deep ravine behind the Maternity Hospital.
The last house in a dead end, a very quiet place indeed.
Once coming home I saw a bird in the grass about the size of a sparrow.
It trailed through the grass with fumbling unsteady steps as if severely wounded, and dragged its wings behind it.
Giving it a passing look I went on burdened with too many problems of mine own.
The next day I learned that at the same moment a young man was butchered in the ravine.
Dope-fiends’ squabble.

That small bird was the soul of the murdered and no chance to make me change this my belief…)

In the autumn following the summer of separate vacations, our family became fans of mushroom harvesting excursions. 
Of course, mushrooms were everywhere just a couple of steps to any side away from the school path and there’s russula growth for you, or solid portabella, long-legged enoki, let alone oily agarics.
Only that the busy passers-by had no time for mushrooms.
But when they give you the permission to leave the Zone for a whole Sunday and provide a truck to take the mushroom pickers to the out-of-the-Zone forest the 'noiseless hunting' starts looking more attractive.

Perhaps, all those conveniences were established earlier for the Object dwellers only my parents did not use them until they needed a firmer reconciliation after the split summer.

(...I did not think about such things then and was just happy to go with my parents to a forest for mushroom harvesting…)

Dad made special pails of cardboard, light and capacious.
In the forest, the mushroom pickers parted and wanderer everybody by themselves exchanging at times distant echoes of ‘ahoy!' 
I liked watchful walking in a silent autumn forest, wet from the drizzle and fog.
Of course, we didn't pick russulas – too fragile, but portabella or agarics were a good find. 
Dad made a small knife for each of us so as not to spoil the mycelium. 
Besides, on the cut, it's seen at once whether the mushroom had worms or not. 
The best of the mushrooms is ‘the white', or porcini, but I never came across any of them. 
The unknown ones I took to Dad and he explained – those were shiitake, or morels or mere throwaways. 
At home, the mushrooms were poured in a big basin and flooded with water 
Then Mom cooked or marinated them.
All that was delicious, no doubt, but hunting them in the woods was much more delightful.

One Sunday when the parents went on a visit somewhere, the three of us began to have fun and chase each other all over the apartment.
The game was ended by the knock at the door.
There stood the new neighbors from the first floor.
They said that parents’ absence is not the reason for mayhem starting and on their return they would be told that we could not behave ourselves in their absence.
Later in the evening, Natasha came running for the landing to announce the alarm: the parents were already coming but the neighbors from the apartment beneath us stopped them with complaints. 
Oh-oh, we're going to be let have it!

How come she was at the right time in the right place?
Very easy. 
Because the landing was the continuation of the apartment and it was so wide that we could play balloon-volleyball there. 
And Mom even started going out there in the evenings, when she was not at work, to jump skipping rope.
We followed her example, but I wasn't too good at it. 

When the parents entered the hallway, Dad's face was very angry.
Without taking off his coat, he went to the kitchen and brought a stool to the parents' room.
He moved the carpet aside and smashed the stool against the floor.
‘Keep quiet, eh?!’ shouted he to the floorboards and banged them again with the stool.
‘Now, Okay?’
I realized that we would not be punished, but something still was somehow wrong.

When leaving for school we took with us sandwiches in our school bags.
Mom wrapped them in newspaper sheets so that during a break we would take them out and eat.
For Sasha and Natasha, she made one package for both because they studied in the same class. 
And before going to school we also had breakfast in the kitchen.

But that Saturday I left for school without my school bag and alone.
The senior classes were playing a military game that day and the junior kids got a day off on that account.
The participating classes were divided into two groups: ‘Blues’ and ‘Greens’.
For a start, the ‘Blue' and ‘Green' troops would march into the forest in different directions. 
The goal was to track down the enemy, surprise them and take away their banner.
Each trooper had to have paper shoulder straps of the color denoting who he belonged to.
When the shoulder straps got torn off in the game, the trooper was considered killed, one missing shoulder strap meant being a prisoner of war.

In the morning I came to the kitchen late for breakfast. 
Firstly, I was not as usual awakened by the rise of the younger ones – they did not have to go. 
Secondly, the previous night I was busy sewing the shoulder straps with short frequent stitches to my jacket so that they would sit tight and not be easily torn off and for that reason, I went to bed late. 
Mom was already leaving for her work and said there was some pasta remained from the previous day or, if I wanted, I could cook myself an egg for breakfast.
I said that I did not know how to cook an egg, but she answered it’s as easy as pie: to have a soft-boiled egg you boil it for a minute and a half and three-minute boiling makes it hard-boiled.
She even brought the alarm-clock from their room and put it on the windowsill next to the mushroom jar before leaving hurriedly.

The mushroom in the jar had nothing to do with the forest.
Such mushrooms were kept in almost every kitchen of the Object.
It floated in three-liter jars like a piece of greenish slime.
The water in those jars became pleasant to the taste, like kvass beverage. 
When the drink in the jar was almost ended and the mushroom touched the bottom, the jar was refilled with water and put aside for a couple of days to acquire the taste.
Women were sharing with each other pieces of the mushroom because if it grew too thick and left little room for water. 

I poured water into a pan and loaded it with an egg, lighting the gas under the pan I checked the time by the alarm clock.
After a minute and a half, the water did not look too hot and I decided – Okay, let it be hard-boiled. 
After three minutes some rare wisps of steam were starting to rise from the water and lots of small bubbles gathered on on the sides of the pan and I turned off the gas because I had clear-cut instructions for cooking boiled eggs.

(...the saying that ‘the first pancake is lumpy' can be safely expanded with ‘the first boiled egg is liquid messy'…) 

The participants in the war game were mostly in sportswear and were reluctant to enter the school building.
So all crowded together in the yard in small separate groups.
In mine, everybody appreciated the way my shoulder straps were sewn to the jacket. 
See? No way of grasping the strap, nothing like by those boys who fixed theirs with just a couple of stitches.
Their shoulder straps stuck out like a bridge and asking to be torn off with a little finger.

At that moment some unfamiliar boy, maybe from the parallel class, started a scrap.
He spread me on the ground and tore my shoulder straps in tatters.

(...I never knew how to fight, neither do I now.
Most likely, I just called him ‘fool!’ afterward and went to the forest – back home…)

In the forest, I took off my jacket. 
Instead of the shoulder straps, there remained a narrow frame-like paper strip under the tight close stitches of a black thread.
I plucked the paper scraps out and scattered over the fallen foliage.
Maybe I even cried for resentment of being so unruly and prematurely killed, even before the start of combat actions while I, in fact, dreamed of capturing the enemy headquarters…

Sometimes at the lessons, I drew designs for my secret shelter. 
It was located in a cave, inside an impenetrable rock like those people had in ‘The Mysterious Island’ by Jules Verne.
But to my cave, you could only get by the underground passage which began far from the cliff, in the depths of the forest. 
Well, and in the cave itself, there was still a passage upward, into a smaller cave, where there were narrow crevices in the wall to look out and see what's going on around. 

I drew the designs with a pencil, the reverse end of which was carved into a mask like those stone idols in the Easter Island.
The skill of pencil carving I also acquired at school.
As easy as a pie, all you need is a razor blade.
In the pencil's not pointed tip, you carve out two longitudinal grooves marking both sides of the future nose.
A deep cross cut beneath the grooves unites them and becomes the tip of the nose.
Now, starting one centimeter off the nose tip produce a gradually deepening wide cut up to the nose; it makes the nose to stick out and will be the lower part of the face. 
The notch across that cut is the thin-lipped mouth and two short slits across the long grooves bordering the nose become the eyes.
One more idol from the Easter Island is ready.

But you should be careful about the razor blade, it’s awfully sharp and can cut your fingers.
Such razor blades are usually taken from the tiny paper pack of blades that Dad keeps in the bathroom.
The inscription ‘Neva’ stands on the blue paper of pack together with and the neat picture of a black sailboat.
And each blade in the pack is in a separate blue envelope with the same inscription and picture...

With the start of the winter, the skin on my hands began to peel off.
At first, there formed some small spots of dry skin and, when rubbed and pulled at, it would go off in patches.
I didn’t tell anyone about it and in a week took it all off, like a pair of gloves, up to the wrists.
Only the palms skin remained the same.
And beneath the peeled of patches, there was new skin again...

(..I have no idea if there is some scientific explanation for such a phenomenon, yet, in my humble opinion, the cause of it was in the book I saw on the shelves in the Detachment Library. 
It was titled ‘The Man Is Changing His Skin’.
I didn’t borrow it to read but the title was remembered and, being an impressionable child, I checked the possibility of the announced change…)

 I always had two Achilles’ heels – naivety and impressionability.
Once I was so impressed by a song that wanted to write down its lyrics at any rate, although it was in a foreign language.
My attempt went no further than the first line of which I also was not too sure.
You listened to the record once and heard - ‘esso latsmaderi’ but at the next try it turned into ‘esso dazmaderi’.
But it’s not possible that a recorded disk would change the words on the fly!
And the project remained unaccomplished.

(...many years later I met the song again and recognized it when Louis Armstrong sang: 
- Yes, sir, that’s my lady…)

The skating rink across the road from the very beginning was meant for playing hockey.
In the course of time, it was framed with a low compact fence of planks and two hockey goals put at the field ends. 
After snowfalls, the boys cleared the field with a pair of wide metal sheets resembling the bulldozer blade with a long horizontal handle above it. 
No less than two or three boys were needed for pushing the blades.
The snow was shifted to the fence opposite the locker room shed and shoved out of the field with large snow shovels of plywood.
That's why behind that fence there accumulated a snow hillock along all the field. 
The boys dug long tunnels in that artificial snow mountain.
It became a growing system of tunnels with ramifications, dead ends and all that, like in the blueprint drawings of my secret shelter. 

In the evenings, we played hide-and-seek in those tunnels under the ink-black darkness because the posts with lighting lamps were only on the locker room’s side of the ice rink.
But when you switched a flashlight in a tunnel there appeared white glacial walls with innumerable bright sparks in them...

The year was ending.
Almost no sheets remained there under the shiny black spine of the tear-off calendar on the wall next to the kitchen window.
The tear-off calendars had as many sheets as there were days in a year. 
The sheets were small, about the size of the palm, yet when a year started there was a lot of them giving the calendar such a plump and solid air.
Each day one sheet was torn away with the date printed on it and information about the time of sunrise and sunset and what was the current phase of the moon.
But all that data was printed down the sheet and in the center there was the portrait of one or another Member of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union whose birthday it was or, with no Member born on that day, a picture of this or that hero of the Civil War or the Great Patriotic War.
On the reverse side, you could read their biography, but briefly because of the sheet's small size. 
Once a month or two you could come across a crossword in the calendar and four dates printed in red because they were holidays: New Year, May Day, the Great October Revolution Day, and the Constitution Day. 

But later Mom started to buy tear-off calendars for women where instead of Members' portraits there were pictures of birch-trees with the sewing patterns on the back of the sheet, or recipes for pies and all sorts of useful tips.

The was the advice from which I learned how to wean your husband from his propensity for spirits. 

Pour a quantity of pulverized burnt cork into a glass of wine and treat your husband with it before the arrival of guests.
When the guests gather, the burnt cork will show its effect and the drunkard will not be able to hold the gases in his stomach. 
He’ll start to fart and feel ashamed before the guests and that will make him abandon the disgraceful habit.

I shared the method with Mom because at times she scolded Dad for his propensity. 
However, Mom refused to use the advice. 

(..I couldn’t understand her then – why to complain if you don’t want to eliminate the cause of discomfort?
When I grew up I understood my Mom, but now I cannot understand those who could print such idiocy.

You see, my understanding is like that crane from a fable on a marsh swamp – he pulls his neck out free, but a wing gets bogged down, the wing is out—oops!—a leg got stuck…)

One week before the winter holidays the class teacher announced that at the New Year Eve party there would be held the contest for the best fancy dress and our class should win it, or, at least, try to win.
I was ignited by the task at hand and immediately got the idea of an irresistible carnival dress – no bears or robots anymore, I'd dress up as a gypsy girl! 

Mom laughed when I shared my plan but promised to help because she had connections at the Amateur Dancing Activities.

At my cautious inquiries in the class – who was preparing what for the contest the boys were answering the same: no one would make any fancy dress, everyone will come in their casual wear.
Such dull prospect dismayed me because at a New Year party everything should be like in the movies ‘Carnival Night’ with streamers flying crisscross through the snowfall of confetti.
I tried to convince myself it was just an excess panicking like before ‘The Three Musketeers’ movie show which took place after all.
Well, and if the boys did not want to come in fancy dresses then there were other guys especially from the senior classes who you could rely on.

Mom made a mask for me as that of Mr. X in the movies ‘Mr. X’.
It also was of black velvet, only with the addition of black gauze hanging to the lips.
Now, no one would recognize me because from the Amateur Activities dancers she brought a real wig with a long black braid reaching to the waist, a red skirt, a fine blouse and a black shawl with big red flowers. 
When I changed into all those things, Mom and her new woman-friend who moved into the Zimins' flat were laughing until they were in tears. 
Then they said, what if someone invited me to a dance? I had to have some practice.
On their advice, I picked up a chair and slowly span with it under a waltz from a record.
They laughed even more and said I needed female shoes my boots did not suit the red skirt.
The shoes were also found but they had high heels because you couldn’t wear sandals in winter.
Walking on high heels was very uncomfortable but Mom said ‘bear it, Cossack and get trained while you have the time’.

An hour before the New Year party, my carnival costume was packed in a large bag and I went to school through the dark, almost night forest.
At school, I went up to the second floor, where even the light was not turned on, and in one of the dark classrooms, I changed into my fancy dress. 
Descending to the first floor I held onto the railing because walking in high-heel shoes is no better than if you'd got skates on your feet. 
 
The vestibule and the first-floor corridors were also not lighted in full, yet there was enough light to see that everybody, even the guys from senior classes had come albeit not in the school uniform yet nothing like carnival costumes. 
They stood in groups or ran back and forth and fell silent when I clapped the shoe heels past them on the parquet flooring, then on the tiles of the vestibule and again on the parquet in the next corridor. 
And where was the celebration then? 
Where were the streamers and confetti?

A couple of senior boys talked to each other in a whisper and approached me. 
‘Can you tell the future, gypsy girl?’
At that moment the School Pioneer Leader appeared and took me with her to the gym.
The hall was crowded with rows of seats to the New Year Tree and on both sides of it because on the stage with dark blue curtains, there was going to be performed a play.
In vain had I waltzing that chair at home, there would be no dancing whatsoever. 

The Pioneer Leader seated me in the first row in front of the stage.
Then she left briefly and brought a masked girl in a Harlequin suit: another stupid fool like me.
She was placed in the chair next to me, we were the only mummers in the gym.

The curtain fell open and the ninth grade presented their production of Cinderella.
They had good costumes. 
I especially liked the tartan cap of the Jester.
The performance ended, everyone started to clap and I realized that now even the Jester would change into a jacket and pants.
I left the gym and went upstairs to the dark classroom where I had left my clothes and changed the painful high-heel shoes for my long-desired felt boots. 
What a bliss!
Exiting the school, I met my Mom and Natasha who came to admire my masquerade triumph. 
I briefly explained that there was no carnival and we went home through the same night forest.

(...the main trick for being happy is not to look back and the memory will quickly do its job – it will forget and wipe out your blunders, sorrows, and pains. 
Just keep looking forward to pleasures, successes, and holidays…)

After the New Year celebration party, the long holidays and seventeen sequels of ‘Captain Tankesh' on the TV were awaiting me ahead. 
In the parents’ room, as always, the Christmas Tree was touching the ceiling with the star on its top and among the shiny decorations there also hung chocolate candies ‘Battons’ and even ‘Bear Cub in the Forest’.
After the lead balloon carnival, life smiled again.

On the New Year's Eve Dad worked the night shift so that the lights did not fade on the Object’s Christmas trees.
And on the first morning of the New Year Mom left to her work so that water would uninterruptedly flow from the kitchen taps.

That morning I woke late when Dad had already been home from work.
He asked who visited the previous night and I answered that Mom’s new woman friend from the Zimins flat came briefly.

Then I read, went to the rink, played hockey in felt boots and came back to the sofa and books.
I was watching the concert of Maya Kristalinskaya on the TV—she as always wore a wide kerchief around her neck to hide the traces of the personal life drama—when Mom came from work.
I ran from the parents’ room to the hallway and Dad was already there from the kitchen.
He stood in front of my Mom who had not yet had time to take off her coat.

Then something strange happened, they stood still facing each other when Dad’s hand, as if by itself, disrupted the stillness to slap Mom’s cheeks
Mom said:
‘Kolya! What's that?' 
And she burst into tears which I had never seen by her. 
Dad began to yell and show a saucer with cigarette butts which he found behind the blind on the windowsill in the kitchen.
Mom said something about her woman-friend neighbor but Dad answered that the neighbor did not smoke Belomor-Canal cigarettes.
He flung his sheepskin overcoat on and before slamming the door after himself, shouted: 
‘You had been swearing to never even shit in one field with him!’

Mom went to the kitchen and then to her new woman-friend in the former the Zimins’ flat over the landing.
I put on my coat and felt boots and went to the rink again.
On the way, I met my brother and sister coming back home from there. 
I did not say anything to them about what happened.
At the rink, I was hanging around until full dark.

I did not want to play but neither want I to go home.
So I just aimlessly milled about or sat by the stove in the shed.
Then Natasha came up to me on the already empty ice field and said that Mom and my brother were waiting for me on the road and that at home Dad dumped the Christmas tree on the floor and kicked Sasha and that we were going now to spend the night at some acquaintances’.

Under the desolate light of lamps above the empty surrounding road, the four of us walked to the five-story building and Mom knocked on the door of the apartment on the first door. 
There lived the family of an officer with two children.
I knew the boy by the school, but not his sister who was from a too senior grade. 
Mom had brought the sandwiches with her but I did not feel like eating. 
She and my brother and sister went to sleep on the folding coach and I was bedded on the carpet next to the bookcase.
Through its glass doors, I saw the book ‘The Captain Dare-Devil' by Louis Bussenard and asked for permission to read it while the light from the kitchen was reaching the carpet. 

In the morning we left and crossed the courtyard of the Block to a distant corner building.
I knew that that was a hostel for officers but I had never entered there. 
In the long corridor on the second floor, Mom told us to wait because she needed to have a talk with the man whose name I absolutely don’t remember.
The three of us waited silently for a stretch of time after which Mom returned and led us home. 

She opened the locked door.
From the hallway through the open door to the parents’ room the Christmas tree was seen lying on its side by the balcony door.
Splinters of smashed decorations scattered the carpet around it. 
The wardrobe stood with its doors ajar and in front of it there was a soft mound of Mom’s clothes, each ripped from top to bottom...

Dad was away from home for a whole week.
Then Natasha said that he was coming the next day and so it happened.
And we started to live on...

When the holidays ended it turned out that before them I forgot in my schoolbag a newspaper package with an uneaten sandwich. 
The ham got soured and filled the schoolbag with the smell of rot.
Mom washed it from inside with the soap but the smell lingered and didn’t pass completely...

At school, they announced the contest between the pioneer grades at collecting waste paper. 
After classes, our class pioneers, in groups of threes or fours, visited the houses of the Block and the five-story buildings knocked on doors and asked if they had some waste paper. 
At times they gave us piles of old newspapers and magazines but I did not go the corner building with the hostel for officers.

And at the Detachment Library, they gave us a few piles of books. 
Some of them were worn and tattered but others not, like ‘The last of Mohicans’ by Fenimore Cooper with engraving pictures and only slightly damaged binding covers...

One evening, when we were playing hide-and-seek in the snow tunnels along the outer side of the skating rink, an older boy said that he could lift five people at a time. 
Easily, with just one hand.
I started to argue and told it's impossible and we made a bet.
He said that the five people should lie down in a compact group for more convenient grasping.
He and I, as opponents, and a few more boys went towards the Bugorok-Knoll beyond the light from the lamps above the rink and found an even spot.

I lay down on my back in the snow and stretched out my arms and legs, as he instructed, and four more boys lay on my extremities: one boy on each of them, all in all, five people. 
Only he didn’t try to lift us.
I felt alien fingers unbuttoning my pants and entering my underwear.
I couldn’t shake off the four boys who pinned me to the ground and only shouted something.
Then I suddenly felt free because they all ran away.

I buttoned my pants up and went home angry with myself that I could so easily be fooled.
One more visit to the topmast with a teapot.

(...and only quite recently it suddenly dawned on me that it was not a practical joke as with ‘showing Moscow’.
It was the check to verify suspicions caused by my fancy dress at the New Year party.
It’s ridiculous to say that almost a whole life passed until I guessed what’s what.
And this is the third, but, perhaps, the main of my Achilles’ heels – retarded thinking...)

On the way from school, my friend Yura Nikolayenko told me that my Mom was drawn in the caricature pinned to the stand by the House of Officers. 
In the picture, she tossed whether to go to her husband or to her lover. 
I made no answer but for more than a month, I did not go anywhere near the House of Officers. 

Then, of course, I had to go there because they showed ‘The Iron Mask’’ with Jean Marais in the role of D’Artagnan.
Before the show with my inside squeezed into a scared tangle I somehow approached the stand, but on the Whatman sheet, there already was a new caricature of a drunk driver in a green padded jacket and his wife with children weeping with blue tears. 

(...I felt alleviated then but for some reason, I still can vividly see the caricature of my Mom which I have never really seen. 
She’s got a sharp nose in it and long red fingernails while tossing – to one or to the other?
No, Yura Nikolayenko did not describe the picture for me, he only retold the inscription...) 

In the early spring, Dad came home very upset after a meeting at his work. 
There again began redundancy purge and, at the meeting, they said who else to cut off if not him?

So we started to pack things up for loading them into a big iron railway container as other redundant people before us.
However, the loading itself was done by Dad because the four of us left two weeks earlier. 

In the evening on the departure eve, I was sitting on a couch in Mom's new woman-friend's room across the landing. 
The woman and Mom went to the kitchen and I stayed back with a thick book which I took from the piles of waste paper at the Detachment Library and later presented to Mom’s woman-friend.
I idly turned the pages of that biography of some ante-revolution writer looking through the rare inset illustrations with photographic pictures of unknown people in strange clothes from another alien world. 
For some reason, I opened it somewhere in the middle and inscribed on the margin:
‘we are leaving.’
Then I remembered the principle of creating animated cartoons: if on several subsequent pages you spell some word—a letter per page—and then bend the pages and release them one by one making them quickly flip one after another, the letters will run in turn forming the written word.
 So I wrote letter-by-letter in the corners of subsequent pages:
‘I-S-e-h-r-g-u-e-y-O-g-o-l-t-s-o-f-f-a-m-l-e-a-v-i-n-g.’
But the cartoon did not work out, well.
Actually, it did not work at all but I did not care. 
I just slammed the book, left it on the couch and walked away. 

Early in the morning, a bus left the Block for the station of Valdai. 
Besides the four of us, there were a couple of families going on their vacations. 
When the bus turned to the road of concrete slabs descending from the Block, Mom suddenly asked me who we would better live with: my Dad, or the man whose name I absolutely do not remember.
‘Mom! We do not need anyone! I will work, I’ll be helping you,’ said I.
She did not answer.
And those were not just words, I believed in what I was saying, but Mom knew the labor laws better than me.

When the descent was over, at the turn to the Pumping Station and the Checkpoint, the bus stopped.
The man about who Mom asked me, came in.
He approached her, took her hand telling something.
I turned away and looked out of the window.
He went out, the bus slammed the door and drove on.
We pulled up at the white gate of the Checkpoint.
The sentries checked us and the vacationers and kept the gate open letting the bus out of the Zone.

A soldier grasping with his hand a tube in the white-paint-coated gate grate floated by behind the glass of the bus window. 
I was fully realizing it was the last time I saw the stranger soldier and the familiar gate, and that I would not ever return there.
It only that I did not know yet that in that way I was leaving my childhood...

