~~~ The  Adolescence ~~~

(...and, probably, that's it.
Enough is enough.
It’s time to roll the potatoes out of the glowing ashes before they turn firebrands too.
Coals are rich in kilo-calories but the taste is not what I’d like.
Besides, it’s getting pretty dark and I have no wish to overeat at late hours.
How does it run, that prescription of wise Arab dietarian: ‘...and the dinner leave to your enemy’?
Some useless wisdom.
Where would I get them those enemies from?
They'd formatted me to live in the society where each man is a friend, comrade, and brother to any other man. 
And, by the by, it’s so tempting to share the bullshit they’ve fostered you in and fed up to your ears.

One day I poured out a sermon on your elder step-sister, Lenochka, that all people were good and kind without really realizing how good they, actually, were, such a distressing pity.
And, as my damn stars would have it, there was Shakespeare's ‘Richard III' on TV that same evening. 
What a treat! 
She eating the tube with her eyes from while those kind and good people, unaware of their innate goodness, were strangling, torturing and cutting each other's throats.
And the next morning she watched the rerun too.
You can’t just give Shakespeare the shake, it’s classics.
Since then, I'm in a state of an armed neutrality against the TV. 

All that is said to emphasize the fact that even if I had an enemy I’d sooner give him my last shirt but not my dinner, especially when it’s potatoes backed in the fire ashes.
The moment you break their charred crust and pour a pinch of salt into their steamy core you see the light of Truth that no oysters, lobsters and other fancy kulebyaki can hold a candle to them.
Oh, no! 
I leave all kinds of freaky nourishment to abstruse gourmets ‘cause we, plain villagers, don’t care for too much: a good grub and the plum dough would do, thanks.
And were I a younger man but not a Negro advanced in my years and pressed by all kinds of problems in the course of the struggle for life, then to them and to them only would create I an ode of love and gratitude – to potatoes baked in the fire ashes.
No wonder, that in the most poignant episode in the books by Julian Semenov his main protagonist Stirlitz, aka Soviet secret service agent Isaev, dressed in the uniform of a Fascist officer bakes potatoes in the fireplace of his Berlin apartment to celebrate the Day of the Soviet Army and Navy. 
However, with all due respect to his nostalgic patriotism, no, sir – dat’s ain’t da thin’.
To understand the taste of baked potatoes you need to sit on the ground, under the open sky, with an evening like this one around you...)

In Konotop, Grandma Katya kissed, in turn, all of us in her kitchen and started crying.
Mother began to console her, then she noticed two kids’ heads peeking from behind the doors to the room.
‘They’re Luda’s kids?’ asked Mother.
‘Yes, they’re our Irochka and Valerik. So big kids already. She’s three years old and Valerik will soon be two.

Then their father, Uncle Tolik, came home from his work.
For the first time in real life and not in the movies I saw a man with a bald patch from his forehead to the back of his head, but I tried not to stare too much. 
An hour later he and I went out to meet my Aunt Luda.
The store she worked at closed at seven and she was always coming with bags from work.

Walking with Uncle Tolik, I studied the road to the Underpass, which the Konotopers were still calling Overpass.
I vaguely recollected a long wait before the railway barrier would rise to open the overpass built of wooden black-smeared sleepers between the rails and a crowd of people interspersed with a couple telega-carts drawn by horses and some truck rushed from both sides to cross the railway. 
At that time we were going from Konotop to the Object...

In my absence, they had built a high concrete tunnel under the multi-track railway hence the official name – Underpass, but folks kept calling it the old way – Overpass. 
On the other side of the Under-Overpass, long red trams were running from the City to the Station and back.
Aunt Luda had to arrive by one of those coming from the City.
Uncle Tolik persuaded me to approach her under the rare lights over the road tilting into the Under-Overpass, grab one of her bags and ask in a husky voice: 
‘Not too heavy for you?’
But she recognized me even though Uncle Tolik pushed the peak of my cap over my eyes.

We all together went to the Nezhin Street and Uncle Tolik was carrying the bags with food that Aunt Luda was taking from the store she worked at and paying for on her payday.
After going in and out of the Under-Overpass we crossed the Bazaar along its aisle between the empty at that hour counters with high lean-to roofs like those gazebos and having passed approximately as much more, turned into the Nezhin Street. 
There were two or three lights on log lampposts along its considerable length, but they were enough to distinguish it from the rest, unlighted streets. 

In Konotop, we arrived before the last quarter of the school academic year and went to School 13. 
The school was in the unevenly cobbled with fieldstones Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street, right opposite the Nezhin Street. 
Old folks called it ‘Cherevko’s school’.
Under the Tsar, some rich man from a nearby village of Podlipnoya, named Cherevko, built a two-story pub-house, but the then authorities didn’t allow him to open up because of pub's location too near to the factory – all the working class would become drunkards! – and Cherevko donated the house to a school of four classrooms.
In the Soviet era, they added to 'Cherevko's school' a long barrack-style one-story building also of bricks.
The addition stretched along a quiet side street sloping toward the Swamp, otherwise named the Grove separating the village of Podlipnoye from Konotop. 

I remembered how on my first visit to Konotop Aunt Luda and Mother took me to have a swim in a round pond near the village with the shores of dark soft earth smeared by ducks who swimming at the opposite shore...

On the way to school for the first time, I couldn't get the meaning of canvas pouches with long strings carried by many students along with their schoolbags or leatherette folders.
It turned out, they were carrying their ink-pots to write at the lessons.
The next morning the look was not new to me anymore, although the schoolchildren at the Object had long ago started writing with fountain pens which had ink-ampoule inside.
The ink was sucked in the ampoule through the pen and lasted for almost a week if you did not write too much.

After the deafening ding of a huge electric bell for a break, everyone was going out into the wide courtyard with an ancient tree in its center and the low building behind it that comprised the Pioneer Room, the workshop for Handicraft lessons, the school library and, as I learned later the ski storage room. 

The gym with its windows grated from inside to prevent smashing the panes with ball hits at PE lessons was attached at a right angle to the far end of the long one-story building.
The whitewashed brick hut of toilets stood opposite the blind wall of the gym.

All the break long the students crowded on and around the narrow high porch at the entrance door.
The bigger boys perched in rows on both iron railings at the head of the steps until a passing-by teacher would make them climb down and they'd reluctantly obey only to light back up after the teacher disappeared in the entrance doorway.
A lively trickle of students kept flowing to the toilets in the courtyard corner but the majority of boys, and only boys turned around the gym corner before reaching the white hut. 

There in the narrow passage between the gym and the high fence of the neighboring garden, life ran high in a brisk cash game for kopecks.
The school Las Vegas was playing ‘bitok’.
The average stake constituted two or three copper kopeks.
If you had nickels, say, ten, fifteen, twenty or even fifty-kopeck coin, it'd be exchanged at once.
The stakes were stacked on the ground, one coin atop another, each one with heads up.
Then a bitok came into play. 
What’s a bitok?
It’s hard to say – every player had his favorite piece of iron: a bolt, a railroad spike, a polished ball from a huge bearing – there were no limits, you could use whatever you wanted even a stone.
Even absence of any equipment was no problem: anyone would readily lend you his bitok for hitting.
Hitting what?
Yes, the stack of kopecks, of course.
All the coins turned over with your hitting and showing the tails, were yours.
Collect and put them in your pocket and hit the remaining stubborn heads. 
With no coin turned over, the next player started his tries.
And who opens the game?
The one with the highest stake in the stack.

Sometimes from the gym's corner a warning shout ‘shuba!' signaled approaching of some male teacher. 
The money immediately disappeared from the ground into the pockets, cigarettes hid in the hollowed palms. 
However, the alarm was always false – the teachers turned to the toilet where there was a boarded cabin for the Director and teaching staff. 

In just three games I lost fifteen kopecks, that Mother gave me for a cabbage pie from the school canteen.
And no wonder because the bitok virtuosos were trained their hands with their bitoks at home while I had to hit with a borrowed one.
Maybe for the better – I didn't have time to get addicted. 

On my first day at school the class Mistress, Albina Grigoryevna, planted me next to a skinny red-haired girl, Zoya Yemets. 
I didn't use Zoya's inkpot, yet my presence at her desk was all the same resented by Sasha Dryga, a grown-up double repeater with a greasy forelock down to his eyes.
After the lessons, he kept me aware of the fact.

And on the way home I made friends with my classmate Vitya.
His last name sounded a bit scary though it’s a commonplace one among the native Ukrainian family names – Skull.
Our friendship had a sound foundation – we both were going along the same Nezhin Street and he also lived in it only further, next to the Nezhin Store which was halfway from any of the street ends. 

The following day I asked Albina Grigoryevna for moving me to the last desk in the left row, to Vitya Skull, because we were neighbors and could help each other with home assignments.
And at the desk in front of us, there was sitting Vadya Kubarev, alone. 
That way was started our triple friendship.

The last names at school were, naturally, used only by the teachers, among the students Skull turned into Skully, Kubarev became Kuba and so forth.
What handle did I get?
Ogle or Goltz?
Neither.
If your name was 'Sehrguey', they did not bother about the last name and everyone automatically called you "Gray".

Friendship is power.
When the three of us were together even Sasha Dryga refrained from bullying.

Friendship is knowledge.
I shared poetry not included in the school curriculum but memorized by all the boys at the Object like ‘To get insured from the cold...’, and ‘The light was burning in the pub...’, and ‘Vaniyka-Halooy went to the fair...’ and other short but flowery pieces of rhymed folklore.
And they, in the context of cultural and philological exchange, explained me the meaning of the endemic expressions like ‘Have you fled from Romny?’ or ‘It’s time to send you to Romny.’
The town of Romny, about seventy kilometers from Konotop, was the seat of Regional Psychiatric Hospital for nuts.

That morning the bitok gambling battles behind the gym ran low.
On that clear April morning, the guys just stood and argued, and waited for confirmation of the rumors that the day before the Central Television news program ‘Time' was mistaken. 
Because of some guy had heard that the guys from School Ten said the last night a man with a parachute landed in the Sarnavsky Forest. 
Sasha Rodionenko, who continued to attend our school though his family had moved to the City center, would soon come.
He should know. 
He would confirm.

I remembered the flight of Gagarin and how Guerman Titov orbited all day long and in the evening he said:
‘Bye for now, I’m going to bed.’
And Dad laughed delightedly and said: 
‘That’s a good one!’

Our cosmonauts were always the first and we, the then boys, were arguing who of us was the first to hear the radio announcement of the flight of Popovich, Nikolayev, the first woman cosmonaut Tereshkova… 

Sasha Rodionenko came but he didn’t confirm anything.
So the news program ‘Time’ was not mistaken.
The sun faded in mourning.
Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov.
In the descending module.
Entering the dense layers of the earth atmosphere.
Perished.

Then Father came and a week later the iron container with our things from the Object arrived at the freight station. 
From there a truck brought the big wardrobe with the mirror on its door, the folding couch, two armchairs with wooden armrests, the TV set and other things and utensils. 

(...now I cannot but feel horrified – how was it possible for ten people: two families and the common Grandma Katya, to fit and live in the same room and kitchen?
But at that time I didn’t think of it at all because if it was our home and since we lived there the way we lived then it couldn’t be somehow different, everything was as it should be and I just lived on along and that’s all it was there to it…)

For the night Sasha and I unfolded the couch and shared it with Natasha, who lay across at out feet with a chair put next to the couch for her legs.
So I and my brother had to pull our feet up or Natasha would start grumbling and complaining to the parents on their bed at the opposite wall: let them tell me and Sasha to stop kick fighting.
Nice news! 
She could stretch her legs out as far as she wanted, but to my offers to swap places, she refused.
The family of Arkhipenkos and Grandma Katya slept in the kitchen...

About three hundred meters from the Nezhin Street and parallel to it went the Professions Street with the endless high fence of concrete slabs around the  Konotop Steam Engine and Car Repair Plant, in short KaPeVeRrZe. 
That’s why the part of Konotop on this side of Under-Overpass was named the KaPeVeRrZe Settlement, or just the Settlement.

On the other side of the Plant, multiple railway tracks separated it from the Station and the adjacent freight station where long freight trains waited for their turn to go further their ways because Konotop was a big junction station. 
At the freight station marshaling yard where they let the wagons roll from the hump into the sorting lines, there constantly sounded shrieking screech of brake blocks and bumps of wagons against each other and indiscernible screaming of loudspeakers about that or another train on that or another sorting line. 
However, in the daytime the marshaling yard Symphony was almost not heard in the Settlement, it needed the background of the night quietude... 

And when the wind blew from the local distillery in the nearby village of Popovka the air smelled unpleasant. 
Not that the stink too fatal but you'd better not to sniff attentively. 

The Nezhin street connected to the Professions Street by a number of lanes.
The first (when coming from School 13) was called the Foundry Street because it was directed at the former foundry of the Plant although not seen behind the concrete wall.
Then came the Smithies Street where the Plant’s smithery could be told by a tall brick chimney behind the same wall.
The next (past our house) was the Gogol Street though, of course, there was no Gogol, or any other writer for that matter, in front or behind the wall.
Those three streets were more or less straight.
Then up to the Nezhin Store followed a maze of differently directed lanes that also, in the end, led to the Plant wall if you knew how to navigate them. 

The Nezhin Store got its name because it stood in the Nezhin Street.
In a high one-story building there were four departments with separate entrances from the street:
‘Bread’,
‘Industrial Goods’,
‘Grocery’, and
‘Fish and Vegetables’.
The ‘Bread’ opened in the morning until they had sold all their loaves and ‘brick’ bread and then they locked it.
In the afternoon it opened again on the arrival of the bread wagon with another bunch of ‘bricks’ and loaves from the Konotop Bread Factory.
The next and largest department—‘Industrial Goods’—with two rows of showcases was manned with three bored saleswomen because they hardly had a couple of customers a day.
But the two saleswomen in the ‘Grocery’ department had their hands full all day long.
At times there even formed a queue on the days when the butter was brought in and they cut its huge yellow cube next to the scales with their enormously big knife and wrapped your two or three hundred grams into the blue friable paper.
If the Grocery was entered by a workman from the KaPeVeRrZe he was served without standing in the line because he handed over the already counted and readied amount of kopecks for vodka and no change was needed.
Besides, he had to return to his workplace as soon as possible for which end he hadn’t even changed from his boiler suites, aka spetzovka.
The choice of vodkas was extensive, of different colors and names: ‘Zubrovka’, ‘Erofeich’, ‘ Let’s Have One More...’ but people bought only ‘Moscow Vodka’ with its green and white sticker.

After the Nezhin Store, there were the Locksmith Street, the Wheels Street and in an unknown depth of the Settlement other streets and lanes... 

In the nearest Sunday after our arrival, Aunt Luda led me, and my brother and sister to the Professions Street that was the only asphalted street in the Settlement. 
Following it in the direction of the Bazaar, we came to the Plant Club for the three o’clock movie show for children.
The Plant Club was a mighty two-story building but as high as a four-story one.
The masonry of its walls and windows had lots of arches, ledges, and columns like a lace-work made of smoky bricks. 
The backside of the Plant Club was also surrounded by the concrete wall. 
In the small square in front of it, there also was the Plant Check-Entrance building in the same ornate ante-revolution masonry style. 

The high lobby of the Plant Club was full of diverse-aged children lining to the small window of the ticket office. 
One boy, a second-grader by his looks, leached Aunt Luda begging ten kopecks for a ticket for him but she yelled and he shut up.
She seemed to enjoy coming to the Plant Club for the afternoon show for children...

So I found out the way to the Club where, among other things, there also was the Plant Library of two huge halls.
The first one was furnished with desks covered by the filings of central newspapers and high cabinets with glazed doors, there stood familiar rows of unread works by Lenin, and Marx, and Engels and other multi-volume collections. 
The next hall had the stacks of normal books for reading. 
Of course, I enrolled immediately because the choice of books on the two shelves of our school library was niggardly poor...

On the May Day, our school went to the demonstration in the City. 
The column was decorated with the portraits on sticks in hands of the students (one portrait for three or four students to carry in turn) presenting the current Members of Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the  Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
Headed by the group of teachers, we marched along the cobble-stoned Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street to the Bazaar where the Professions Street shared its asphalt to the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street for its dive through the Under-Overpass. 
On the other side, the wide and long Peace Avenue opened stretching away under the high railway embankment in the distance, past the Zelenchuk, a housing area of five-story buildings, up to the central Peace Square. 
In the Peace Square, on the left side of the tangentially passing it Peace Avenue, opposite the round-wall basin of the never working fountain in front of the Peace Movie Theater, there stood the red platform past which the whole city marched in the holiday demonstrations, except for the tenants of the five-story buildings around the square – they watched the demonstration from their balconies. 
I envied them at first, but not for long.

On our way to the Square, the School 13 column had time and again to stop for long waits letting the schools of lower numbers go in advance. 
But the working organizations gave way to us: the columns of the Locomotive Depot, or the Railway Distance Of the South-West Railroad, as it was written in white bulging letters on the crimson-velvet covered shields at their columns heads.
No vehicles were seen along all of the Peace Avenue, only people, lots of people on foot which made the May Day so special and unlike other days.
And entering the Peace Square we had to suddenly change our dignified marching to a frivolous trotting as if running in an attack with the Members portraits atilt because, as it would turn out, of our lagging too far behind the previous column.

As School 13 was almost concluding in the march of schools at the demonstration (there were fourteen schools in Konotop) the moment we were passing the red platform the loudspeakers above it shouted:
‘The column of the Konotop Railway Technical College is entering the Square! Hooray, comrades!'
And we had to hooray to others and not ourselves. 

After the Peace Square and past the entrance to the Central Park, the road turned to the right and descended to the Lenin Street, but we didn’t go down there.
In the nearest lane, we piled the Political Bureau Members and red banners on a truck which took them back to our school to sit in the Household Manager's storeroom there till next demonstration. 

And we also went back bypassing the Peace Square because the passages between the building around it were blocked by empty buses and, behind them, militiamen walked around the empty Square. 
But it still was a holiday because before we started for the demonstration Mother was giving each of us fifty kopecks of which there even remained some change because a bar of wrapped in thin paper Creamy ice-cream cost 13 kopecks and Plombir – 18.
The saleswoman in white robes sold ice cream from their plywood double-walled boxes at every crossroads along the Peace Avenue. 

When I returned home, the schoolchildren in white holiday shirts were still walking along the Nezhin Street coming back to the Settlement from the demonstration.
And then I did the first dastardly act in my life.
I went out from the narrow gate and shot in the back of a passer-by boy with a crook pistol.
He chased me, but I ran back to the Zhulka’s kennel so the boy did not dare come up and only called me names...


In the summer my parents bought a nanny-goat from the Bazaar because, when Father received his first salary and brought home 74 rubles, Mother asked in bewilderment: 
‘How? Is that all?’

The white nanny-goat was meant to make living easier, but in fact, it only complicated life because I had to walk it on a rope into the Foundry Street or the Smithy Street to graze the dusty grass under plank fences. 
I refused to drink its milk although Mother kept wheedling that goat milk was very useful for health.
After a while, the goat was slaughtered and tenderized for cutlets but I refused even to try them... 

Sometimes Grandma Katya’s son, Uncle Vadya, came to our hutta at midday break at the Plant in his boiler oil smeared spetzovka.
Uncle Vadya had shiny black hair and a skin of olive hue, like that of young Arthur in the novel ‘Gadfly’ by Lilian Voynich, and the black toothbrush mustache.
He missed the middle finger on his right hand, it was cut off at the beginning of his working career. 
‘I couldn't get it first. Okay, that's my finger dropped on the machine tool, but where's the water dripping on it from? Aha! they're my tears!’ so described he the accident.
Doctors sewed up the stump very well, it turned out smooth and with no scars so that when he made the fig it came out two at once. 
The double-barreled fig looked very funny and no chance they could imitate the trick even remotely.

He lived in his mother-in-law's hutta in the vicinity of the Bus Station.
The Ukrainian language has a special term for a man living with his in-laws, it is ‘primak’, aka Acceptee.
Bitter is the share of an Acceptee! 
He has to be lower than the grass and quieter than water.
He must call his mother-in-law ‘Mommy’, show his respect to the hens she keeps in the yard and wash their legs when they go perching for the night.

We all loved Uncle Vadya – he’s so funny and kind, and always smiling.
And he greeted us in his special way:
‘Well, how are you, golden kids?’

At the age of ten, when a German Company Headquarters were just behind the wall – in the Pilluta’s part of the hutta, Vadya Vakimov climbed onto the hutta’s fence in an endeavor to cut the cable of occupants' telephone connection.
The Germans yelled at him but didn’t shoot and kill right on the spot.
When I asked why he dared to do that, Uncle Vadya replied that he no longer remembered.
Yet, hardly he wanted to become a hero partisan pioneer; to my mind, he was attracted by the multi-colored wires running inside the telephone cables...


On my way to the Nezhin Store, a pair of guys on one bike overtook me.
The one sitting on the trunk jumped off to the ground and gave me a strong slap on the cheek.
Of course, it was an unlimited dishonor but though he was half a head shorter than me, I didn’t fight back in fear of his companion who also got off the bike – the guy was indisputably bigger.
‘I told you’ll be let have it!’ said the offender and they left.
I realized whose back I had shot at with a crook...


The movie shows at the Club started at six and eight in the evening.
The film-goers had to go up the wide dark-red-paint-coated thick-board steps to the second floor. 
The tiled landing up there was always murky despite the two high windows and three doors.
The door to the right opened a small hall with a TV set in front of a dozen rows of seats and a flight of steep iron stairs to the projectionist booth.
On both sides of the TV set, two more big doors led to the spacey hall of the Ballet Studio. 
And now back again to the tiled landing with two more yet unexplored doors.

The first door to the left was always locked because it led to the audience balcony.
And, finally, the next door was open and watched by invariably grim auntie Shura standing by in her helmet-like head kerchief to tear away the check part of your ticket when you entered the hall. 

The floor inside had a slight slant towards the wide screen behind which there was a big stage with two porches and doors by the walls. 
For concerts or puppet theater performances the cinema screen was drawn to the left wall disclosing the dark-blue plushy velvet of the stage curtains.
The open balconies with plaster moldings ran along the side walls yet they didn’t reach the stage.
At the rear wall, the balconies sloped steeply from both sides so as not to block the loopholes of the projectionist booth from where the widening beam of flicking light stretched to the screen with a movie. 

In the lobby on the first floor, next to the window of the ticket office, there hung the film list for the current month painted upon a big frame of the canvas.
Films changed every day except for Monday when there was no cinema at all.
So you could make your choice in advance and ask from Mother twenty kopecks for a ticket.

In summer the cinema expenses completely disappeared.
The Plant Park behind the long dilapidated two-story apartment block, which stood above the descent to the Under-Overpass, was a great money-saver.
In the Park, apart from its three alleys, a locked dance floor, and a big gazebo beer pavilion, there also was the open air cinema behind a pretty high plank fence. 
That fence had enough of convenient gaps and holes in and between the planks in the rear part of the audience.

The show began after nine, almost yet at twilight.
Under the condition, there were at least four spectators who bought their tickets.
The younger generation preferred watching films from outside the cinema.
However, standing at a hole for an hour and a half with your nose buried in planks roughed by merciless time and bad weather was not exactly what you’d call a comfortable pastime.
That’s why the film-going guys took advantageous places in the old apple trees behind the brick structure of the projectionist booth.
If your bough or fork in the tree was not too comfortable next time you'd come earlier and have a better choice of the tree seats. 

The film went on, the warm summer darkness thickened around two or three lamps in the Plant Park alleys and the stars of the night sky flew in the gaps in the apple tree foliage. 
‘The Merry Guys’ with Leonid Utesov were slapping each other with drums and double basses on the silver screen and in less enchanting moments you could stretch out your hand to grope among the apple-tree twigs and find, somewhere between the Cassiopeia and Andromeda constellations, a small inedible crab-apple to tinily bite bitter bits off its stone-hard side.

After a good film, like the one with Rodion Nakhapetov – without fights, wars, but just about life, about death and a beautiful motorcycle riding through shallow water, the spectators walked out of the Park gate to the cobbled Budyonny Street without the usual whistles and yells.
They became a quiet sparse crowd of people as if related by the watched film and now walking through the darkness of a warm night, dwindling at the invisible crossroads, on their way to the lonely lamppost at the junction of Bogdan Khmelnitsky and Professions Streets, next to the Bazaar... 
