
But the main thing because of what the guys were waiting for the summer was, certainly, bathing.
The start of the swimming season took place late May at the Kandeebynno and served the sign of summer coming into its own. 
The Kandeebynno’s a number of fish lakes for breeding of the mirror carp, and the spring head of the Yezooch river.
At times along the lakes’ dams there rode a solitary bicycler-overseer so that guys wouldn’t arrogantly poach with their fishing poles.
And in the last of the lakes they didn’t breed the carp, it was left for bathing of beach-goers.

But to go for a swim at the Kandeebynno you had to know how to get there.
Mother said that she had been there but couldn’t explain the way and it was better to ask Uncle Tolik who both to work and back, and, actually, everywhere went by his motorbike ‘Jawa’; he really was who should know.

The Kandeebynno, according to his instruction, was easy to find.
When going to the City center along the Peace Avenue you pass under the bridge of the railway embankment, take the first right turn.
To miss the turn's impossible because of it's the highway to Romny.
Then follow the road to the intersection where again take to the right and go on until you see the railway barrier.
Cross the railway, turn to the left and here you are – that's the Kandeebynno for you. 

The younger ones, sure enough, pressed for going with me.
We took an old bed cover to lay upon when sunbathing, put it into a mesh-bag, added a bottle of water and went to the Over-Underpass where the Peace Avenue starts.
Up to the railway embankment, the road was known from the May Day demonstration. 
We went under the bridge and saw it at once – the road to the right along the embankment’s base.
Actually, it didn't look a highway because of having no asphalt, yet it was wide enough and it was the first one to the right after the bridge.
We turned and followed it walking along the base of the high embankment.
However, the further we went, the narrower the road became transforming into a wide path, then into a tread and then just disappeared.

So we had just to climb the grass-overgrown embankment, shake the sand out from our sandals and go further stepping on the concrete sleepers or along the iron railheads.
Natasha was the first to notice the trains catching up from behind and we stepped down onto the uneven rubble in the ballast shoulder giving way to the rumble of the wind-whipping cars shooting past us. 
When we reached the next bridge there was no avenue or a street under it, just railway tracks.
Our embankment turned right and started gradually go down to the distant Railway Station.
It became clear, that we were going in the opposite direction and not to the lakes of the Kandeebynno at all.
We did not have time to get too disappointed because far below we noticed a small field at the base of another embankment under the bridge in ours.
Two groups of tiny at that distance guys in light summer clothes and with the mesh-bags like ours and walked towards a grove of green trees, and they even had a ball too.
Where else could they go if not to a beach?!

We climbed down two steep embankments and went along the same path in the field as the previous guys long gone from the sight.
Then we walked through the aspen grove along a lonely railway track with no crushed stone ballast between the wooden sleepers until we reached a highway crossing the track under two raised barriers.
We crossed the highway and followed a wide, at times boggy path among the tall growth of bright green grass.
 The chest straightened out with cautious exaltation: 
- Aha, the Kandeebynno! You won’t flee now!
 Groups of people were walking the same path in both directions but guys going there were more than back-goers.

The path led to a wide canal of dark water between the shore and the opposite dam of the fish lakes and went further along the canal.
We went on and on between green trees, under white clouds in the azure-blue summer sky.

The straight rows of fruit-trees of the no one’s neglected garden rose up a smooth slope to the right of the path.
Then the canal on the left widened into a lake with a white sand beach.
The stretch of sand turned into the grass between the tall currant bushes of the neglected garden.
We chose a free stretch of grass for our bed cover, undressed hastily and ran over unbearably hot sand to the water which was flying and splashing from each and in every direction under the incessant screams and yells and laughter of dozens of people in it. 
Summer! 
Ah, Summer!

Later it turned out that Uncle Tolik hadn't even known there existed that dwindling road along the embankment base.
When his motorcycle at a roaring speed shot from under the bridge in the Peace Avenue he in two seconds reached the Romny highway but going on foot you had to tread to it for more than hundred meters.

In the list of films at the Club for July there stood ‘The Sons of Big Bear' and Skally and I decided to go to the show because we knew that Goiko Mitich starred there as one of her sons. 
Roles of red-skins was Goiko Mitich's specialty and, as long as he was in, it would be a decent film. 
The list, sure thing, did not report all those details or anything else but the title. 
However, the films reached the Club of KaPeVeRrZe a month, or maybe two, after they were shown at the Peace Movie Theater or at the Vorontsov Movie Theater in the Square of Konotop Divisions that's why with the little help of our friends we could take a right choice. 
The reason we didn't rush to the central Movie Theaters was not only in our trust to friends who could give a wrong lead after all but the fact that a ticket at the Peace Movie Theater cost fifty kopecks, at the Vorontsov thirty-five and at the Plant Club mere twenty kopecks! 

That Sunday the three of us—Kubsa, Scally, and I—drove to the Kandeebynno by bikes.
We swam, we made a spring-board for each other, in turn, standing chest-deep in the water with two of us clasping hands for the third to climb upon and dive from.
And, of course, we played ‘spots’, though you couldn’t catch up Kuba in diving.
Then they both got lost somewhere in the crowd of people in the water.

I looked for my friend among the squeals and splashes but couldn't find them anywhere. 
I swam to the other shore, to the dam of the fish lakes.
A couple of guys were fishing there with their eye alert for a convenient opportunity to angle in the mirror carp paradise on the other side of the dam.
I swam back so as not to scare away their fish which could be caught even in the lake for swimmers.
Then I once again scanned the crowd in the water – to no avail, and decided to go ashore. 

Chilled through and through I got to the fry-pan hot sand of the beach when two of them ran from the currant bushes with the hair on their heads almost dry. 
‘Where the hell were you? We’re getting in again. Let’s go!’
‘What a bunk! I’m just getting out!’
‘So what? Let’s go!’
‘Ah, damn! Off we'll drive the City boys!.' 

And we three, whipping up foamy splashes with our running feet rushed to deeper places to dive, and yell, and hoo-ha.
Summer is summer when it is summer…

Kuba did not want to the movies – he had already seen that western, and Scally also changed his mind.
That fact didn’t stop me and I decided to take twenty kopecks from Mother and go to the Club all the same.
At home Grandma Katya told that my parents had left two hours before together with my brother and sister. 
And she didn’t know where they went.
Well, Okay, there were three hours more before the next show at the Club – enough time for them to come back.
At the end of the third hour, I was overcome by unconquerable anxiety, 
Where could they be?
I again asked about it but that time Aunt Luda.
With complete indifference and somewhat chafed she answered:
‘I wouldn’t even have seen you.’
She always became like that when Uncle Tolik was gone fishing.

Two more hours passed, I was late for the show but I didn’t want no cinema no more.
The feeling of an unavoidable and already accomplished catastrophe had eaten into me.
Some truck having run on the sidewalk and vague ambulance sirens were snaring me. 
And only one thing was clear – I no longer had any parents or any brother and sister. 

The dark thickened.
Uncle Tolik pulled up in the street and brought his ‘Jawa’ bike into the yard coming back from his fishing.
He went to hutta and I, crushed by my grief and loneliness, was sitting on the grass next to sleepy Zhulka.
It was already quite late when the iron handle-hook of the wicket clinked.
Sasha and Natasha ran into the yard followed by Mother’s cheerful voice.
I rushed to meet them torn apart between joy and resentment.
‘So and where were you?’
‘Visiting Uncle Vadya.’ Mother said. ‘And what’s up with you?’

I burst into tears confusedly muttering about bear sons and twenty kopecks because I couldn’t explain that I had lived half of that day after the loss of all of them not knowing what could I do without the family.
‘Why didn’t you ask money from Aunt Luda?’
‘So? I did ask and she said she wouldn't like to see me too.' 
‘What? Come on into the hutta !’
And at home, she quarreled with her sister and Aunt Luda said it was all bullshit and she'd only said she wouldn't see me too if I hadn't come. 
But I obstinately repeated my bullshit.
Mother and Aunt Luda shouted at each other louder and louder.
Grandma Katya tried to calm them down – what a shame and the neighbors would hear and the people in the street too. 
Natasha, Sasha, Irochka, and Valerik with frightened eyes crowded in the doorway between the kitchen and the room where Father and Uncle Tolik were sitting silently before the TV set. 

That's how I committed the second meanness in my life – slandering innocent Aunt with false accusations.
Although I had understood her response exactly the way I related to Mother but after the Aunt's interpretation I could admit that, yes, she had answered with those words, however, I did not. 

After the brawl in the hutta I felt guilty before Aunt Luda and her kids, and before Mother, who I lied to, and before everyone because of I was such a sissy ready to wimp like a mommy's son: ‘woe is me! I'm left alone!' 
All of that triggered a slow and inconspicuous process of my alienation and transformation into a ‘cut off piece’ as Father used to say.
I began to live a separate life of my own although, of course, I did not realized or felt anything of the kind but just lived.

Mother and Aunt Luda made up with each other because Aunt Luda showed Mother how to correctly sing the popular at that time ‘Cheremshina blossoms everywhere’ and she was bringing home food you couldn’t buy anywhere.
At all the stores it was sold under the counter to only trusted people or those you would need.

It was fun to listen to Aunt Luda’s tales about the midday-meal break at their store.
All the saleswomen came to their locker room and bragged before each other about the delicatessens they brought that day from home in their glass half-liter jars.
Comparing, making judgments and statements.
Exchanging the recipes.
The store manager ate separately in her office.
When there was a telephone call she answered and yelled the name of the one wanted by the caller.
The saleswoman went to the manager's office to speak on the phone and—however short the talk—by her return there remained hardly one-third in her jar because of everyone was eager to check the taste. 
It’s better once to lick than hundred times to look at, you know…
But there’s one real smartie at the store.
Whenever the manager called her to the phone she put her spoon aside did ‘khirk!’ and – spat into her jar. 
Ugh!
And with no haste would she leave for her phone conversation. 
And no one would ever touch her meal.

Mother also went to work in the trade and got the job of a cashier in the big Store 6 near the Station. 
However, two months later she had a major shortage there.
Mother was very worried and said she couldn’t make such big a mistake.
Possibly, someone of the store workers knocked out a check for a large sum when Mother went to the toilet forgetful to lock the cash register.
Selling of the Father’s coat made of natural leather which he bought while working at the Object, helped out of the pickle.
After that Mother worked in retail outlets without suspicious colleagues, just the seller alone – in the stalls of the Central Park by the Peace Square where they sold wine, biscuits, cigarettes and draft beer...

By the end of the summer there again was a brawl in our hutta.
It was not a sisterly quarrel already but a scrap between a husband and his wife.

Uncle Tolik had a ride to the forest and brought mushrooms from there wrapped in a newspaper.
Not a too big harvest but enough for a pot of soup.
The newspaper package was tied up accurately not to scatter the mushrooms on the way.
Then he put them into a bag and hung it on his motorcycle steer.
However, at home instead of grateful praise, he got a shrill tongue-lashing from Aunt Luda when she saw that the newspaper package was tied up with a strap from a female bra. 
Uncle Tolik kept repeating that he just picked up 'the damn string’ in the forest but Aunt Luda shouted louder and louder that she’d like to see a forest with bras strewn around bushes and that there was no need in trying to make a fool of her because she was not born the day before.
Grandma Katya no longer tried to appease the quarrelers and only looked at them with sad eyes.
That’s how I learned what ‘bra strap’ was.

Uncle Tolik never again went after mushrooms.
Aunt Luda wanted to forbid even his fishing but then he began to raise his voice until they agreed on a compromise – he was allowed to go fishing when he took me with him.
So the following two or three years from spring to autumn every weekend with a pair of fishing rods and a spinner hitched to the trunk of his ‘Jawa' we set off to fishing. 
Mostly we rode to the river of Seim.
At times we fished in the Desna river, but in that case, we had to leave home at dark because it was a seventy kilometers ride there. 

Roaring with its engine ‘Jawa’ shot through the empty streets of the night city when even the militia slept.
After thirty kilometers along the Baturin highway, we got to the Moscow highway where Uncle Tolik sometimes squeezed out of the motorcycle one hundred and twenty kilometers per hour. 
When we turned off onto the field roads the dawn was already catching up with us. 
I sat behind clasping him by the waist with my hands in the pockets of his motorcyclist jacket of artificial leather so that they wouldn’t freeze away under the headwind.

The night around transformed into slowly brightening twilight, forest belts grew up around the fields, high in the sky the clouds became pink in the long rays of the sun which hadn’t yet risen above the horizon.
Those views were no less breathtaking than a high-speed ride. 

Our usual bait were worms from the kitchen garden, but once experienced fishermen advised Uncle Tolik to bait the hook with dragonfly larvae.
Those creatures live underwater in clods of clay by the high river bank and the fish just went crazy about them fighting each other around the hook with a larva...

We drove up to the river bank in a murky twilight.
The river lapped sleepily under thin wisps of fog rising from the water.
Uncle Tolik explained that it was me who had to get those lumps of clay onto the bank.
Just the thought of entering that dark water in the withdrawing night threw a shiver up the spine but a good ride deserved a good dive.
I undressed and, on the advice of the elder, dived headlong into the river. 
Wow! It turned out that in the water it was even warmer than on the bank!

I dragged slippery lumps to the bank and Uncle Tolik broke them there and picked the larvae out from the tunnels they had drilled in the clay.
When he said it was enough I even didn’t want to leave the streaming warmth of the river.

And all the same, that was a merciless exploitation of adolescent labor for which I punished Uncle Tolik that very day.

He preferred a spinner to a fishing rod sending the lure with a sharp throw to a splashdown almost in the middle of the wide river and then spun the reel on the spinner handle pulling the zig-zag flapping-flashing lure back. 
Predatory fish, like pine or bass, chased it and swallowed the hooks in the tail of the lure, if the fisherman luck would have it. 

By noon we moved to another place with a wooden bridge across the river.
Uncle Tolik went over to the other, steep bank and proceeded along throwing the lure here and there.

I watched the floats of the two fishing rods and then stretched out in the grass.
When Uncle Tolik was returning on the opposite bank I didn’t raise my head and looked as he was struggling through the jungle of knotgrass and other growth.
That’s a special effects trick in movie making.
Up to the very bridge, I kept him in the role of a Lilliputian. 

Once Aunt Luda asked me if I had ever seen him visiting some hutta on our fishing rides.
I was absolutely honest and did not lie saying, no, I hadn't. 
As for that time in the Popovka village when he suddenly remembered that we were riding without any bait and dropped me off in an empty village street to wait while he'd ride to some place—not too far off—to dig up worms and be back, all I had seen was the blackened straw in a barn roof, the soft sand of the road, and the thickets of nettles on its sides. 
That’s why I had no scruples when saying ‘no’ to Aunt Luda’s question.

We had had a fall just a couple of times.
The first time while riding through the field along the path on top of a meter high embankment with the tall grass flying by on both sides.
Because of the grass was lower than us, I guessed it was an embankment, but what for among the fields? 
That was the question.
In one place the embankment broke off but the tall grass hid the pit into which ‘Jawa' nosedived after a long jump through the air and threw us both far ahead of itself. 

The other time we had hardly started our ride along the Nezhin Street when the motorcycle got tripped by a piece of iron piled near someone’s hutta so that vehicles when bypassing puddles would not scratch its foundation.
However, both times we got no injuries except for bumps because on our heads there were white plastic helmets.
Only after the fall in the Nezhin Street, the fishing had to be canceled because ‘Jawa's' absorber began to leak oil and needed an urgent repair... 

The Square of Konotop Divisions, called so in honor of the Soviet Army detachments that liberated the city, at first seemed to me being at the end of the world because it's four tram stops from the Peace Square, to which it took the same number of stops from the Station. 
The Square of the Konotop Divisions was as wide as three roads put side by side and had a slight slant along its entire, considerable length.
By its upper right edge there stood a metal tower like the famous one in Paris only more useful because the Konotop’s tower held a huge water tank on its top with the painted inscription ‘I love you, Olya!’ on its rusty side overlooking the Square of Konotop Divisions.
Below the tower, behind the high wall with dense rows of barbered wire, was the city prison.
Opposite the tower, a high brick gate opened to the City Kolkhoz Market and next to it a number of stores went along the slope of the square: ‘Furniture', ‘Clothes', ‘Shoes'… 
At its lower end the square was bordered by a high building with more windows than walls — the Konotop Sewing Factory, followed by a low building with more walls than windows — the City Sober-up Station, and then flew into a street leading to the dangerous outskirt area of Zagrebella.
The danger lay in rascal scamps who were catching guys from other city districts seeing Zagrebella’s girls home.
They would make their victim to imitate the rooster cry or measure the Zagrebella bridge with a match or simply beat him up.

The tram-track rails divided the Square of Konotop Divisions bend-sinister below the blind wall with three exit doors from the Vorontsov Movie Theater which was entered from the Lenin Street. 

When a mobile menagerie arrived in the city they would arrange their trailers and cages into a big square camp between the Sewing Factory and the tram tracks.
It looked like the Czech Taborites defense camp from the History of the Middle Ages school book. 
Only in the middle of their corral of wagons, they added two rows of cages, back to back, for the thick crowd of Konotopers and folks from the nearby villages to walk around them and along the cages in the mobile wall. 
The signs on the cage gratings announced the name and age of the inmate and a swash-like hum of the crowd rumble interspersed with shrieks and roar of caged animals hang over the Square of Konotop Divisions.
That happened once every three years.
 
A couple of times the Wall of Death riders visited the city too.
They erected a high tarpaulin tent with a ring of five-meter plank walls inside.
Two times a day they let the on-lookers in to climb under the tent roof and crane over the wall top watching how they circled arena on two motorcycles to gain the speed enough to get over the ramp onto the wall and bucket along in a horizontal plane with the deafening crash of the motors... 

When you left the Square of Konotop Divisions along the Lenin Street, next to the Vorontsov Movie Theater there was the three-story cube of the House of Householding with all kinds of repair workshops and ateliers.
A stand made of iron painted pipes stood by its wall.
It was crowned with the inviting headline ‘DO NOT PASS BY!’
Black and white photos of people who had got to the Sober-up Station hang there in glazed frames with the paper slips reporting their names and what organizations they worked at. 
Some creepy pictures they were as if of faces got skinned or something. 
I felt pity for those alcoholics.
Probably, because of that far away stand at the Object which I had been so much feared to approach.
I had some affinity if not with them then at least with their kids. 

Further on along the Lenin Street past a crossing, the House of Culture of the Red Metallurgist Plant stood a little way back from the road, behind the tiny square of its own. 
On both sides of that square, there was planted a stand with glue-mounted pages from satirical magazines – the Russian ‘Crocodile’ on the left and the Ukrainian ‘Pepper’ on the right.
Between each stand and the road, there was put a tin and glass stall – ice-cream and lemonade by the ‘Crocodile' and all sorts of knick-knackery by the ‘Pepper'. 
There, among motley trifles, I saw sets of matchbox stickers and on my next trip to the City, I bought the set with pictures of animals. 

When I brought the purchase home to fill up the collection album brought from the Object I realized it wouldn’t be right.
The older stickers collected from matchboxes had the address of their match producing factory and 'the price – 1 kopeck' while the set from the stall was just a pack of sticker-sized pictures. 
Since then I’d lost all interest in the collection and passed it to my friend Scully...

Scully lived near the Nezhin Store with his mother, and grandmother, and the dog named Pirate.
Their house was very small – a kitchen and a bedroom that would fit into the room of our hutta, but it was a detached dwelling.
Next to their hutta there stood a shed with clay plastered walls where, apart from usual household tools and a section for coal to burn in winter, there also stood a pull-barrow – an elongated box resting on two iron wheels and a long iron pipe ending with a crossbar which to drag it along.
Between the hutta and the wicket to the street, there stretched a long garden (not two or three vegetable beds of ours) enclosed by the neighbors’ fences on both sides.
In the autumn and in the spring I came to help Scully with turning the soil in their garden.
Jabbing the spades in the ground we repeated the fashionable Settlement saying:
‘No Easter cake for you! Get a bun and go dig the garden!’
And the released Pirate frisked wildly about the cherry trees along the narrow path to the wicket...

When we moved to Konotop my responsibility became providing our hutta with water.
The enamel buckets with water stood in the dark corner of the tiny veranda on two stools next to the kerosene stove.
From a nail in the wall above the buckets there hung a dipper for drinking or filling a pan with water.
Besides, water was needed in the washstand tank standing in the kitchen.
It also held two buckets of water.
The tap sticking out from the tank bottom above the sink leaked water when pressed from beneath as those taps in the toilets of passenger trains.
And under the sink, there was the slop compartment with a door for the bucket to collect the soapy water. 
When the sloppy bucket got filled it had to be taken out and emptied into the spill pit in the garden.

The water for our hutta I was fetching from the water pump on the corner of Nezhin and Gogol Streets – some forty meters from the gate.
With a bucket hung on the pig-iron nose of the pump, you had to push down the iron handle behind it and the thick stream of water banged into the bucket and if you didn't watch out it would immediately overflow and run onto the road. 
Two daily water-walks (that is four buckets) were enough for our hutta if, of course, there was no washing that day.
On a day of Aunt Luda doing washing for her family, the water was brought by Uncle Tolik. 

When the rains set in the water-walks became a little longer – you had to navigate between the wide puddles in the street.
In winter the pump got surrounded by a small but very slippery skating rink because of spilled water, the ice had to be walked carefully.
The log lamppost by the pump was put in the really right place...

And I was also in charge of bringing fuel for the kerosene stove.
That stove looked like a small gas stove with two burners, only it had two bowls behind to be filled with kerosene. 
Kerosene soaked the asbestos wick that was lighted with a match to cook a dinner, to heat up water for tea or washing on yellow flames bordered with a black edge of soot.

After kerosene, I had to go to the Bazaar with a twenty-liter tin canister. 
In the corner away from the Bazaar counters, they put a big cubic tank of rusty sheet iron. 
The day of kerosene selling was announced with the chalk writing on the tank side – ‘kerosene will be ...’ and then followed the date when it would be brought.
However, so many dates had changed each other—wiped and written over and over again—that no date could be discerned in the white chalk spot, so they just stopped writing and there only remained unchangeable, full of optimism inscription:
‘kerosene will be …!' 

A shallow trench under the tank side accommodated a short pipe from its bottom with a tap blocked by a padlock.
On the announced day a saleswoman in a blue satin robe descended into the trench and sat by the tap on a small stool brought along.
She brought and put under the tap a multi-liter aluminum cauldron, took the padlock away and filled the vessel with the yellowish foamy jet of kerosene, not to the very brim. 
The queue started moving to her with their bottles, canisters, and cans which she filled with a dipper through a tin funnel collecting the pay into her blue pocket.
When the dipper began to knock on the cauldron bottom, she turned on the tap and added the fluid.

By the by, they didn’t need to write the date at all because Grandma Katya each morning visited the Bazaar and two days ahead brought the news when there would be kerosene.
So, on the kerosene day after coming from school, I took the canister and went to spend two or three hours in the line by the rusty tank. 
Sometimes they sold kerosene in the yard of the Nezhin Store equipped with the same tank, but that happened less often and the line was no shorter...

After the summer holidays, I was elected Chairman of the Pioneer Squad Council of our 7th ‘B' grade because the former Chairman (the red-haired Yemets) moved to some other city together with her parents. 
At the Pioneer Squad meeting, two of the nominees announced self-withdrawal without going into the details and the School Pioneer Leader pushed my candidacy. 
When I started sluggish excuses he energetically clarified – all that was not for long because we all soon become members of the Leninist Young Communist League – Komsomol.

(...the structure of the pioneer organizations in the Soviet Union is an awesome example of precise and well-thought-out organizing of any organization. 
In each school every class of the corresponding age became a Pioneer Squad divided into Pioneer Rings.
The Ring Leaders together with the Chairman of the Squad formed the Council of the Pioneer Squad. 
The Chairmen of the Pioneer Squads were the members of the School Pioneer Company Council.
Then there came District or City Pioneer Organizations converging into Republican ones of which was already formed the All-Union Pioneer Organization.
Such a crystal-structured pyramid for you.

That is why the heroes of the Komsomol resistance underground during the German occupation of Krasnodon city did not have to reinvent the wheel.
They used the all too familiar structure, only renamed ‘rings’ into ‘cells’.
If, of course, we take for granted the attestation in the novel ‘The Young Guard’ written by A. Fadeyev.
He composed his work basing on the information from the Oleg Koshevoy relatives.
As a result, in his work he made Oleg the leader of the underground and Victor Tretyakevich, who accepted Oleg to the resistance organization was depicted as a traitor under the name of Stakhevich. 
Fourteen years after the novel publication, Tretyakevich was rehabilitated posthumously and posthumously awarded an order because he did not die in the Soviet NKVD camps but was executed by the fascist invaders. 
By the early sixties a few more secondary traitors, whose names the writer did not bother to change, had served ten to fifteen years in the NKVD camps and were also rehabilitated.

The writer himself had already put a bullet through his head in May 1956, shortly after his participation in the meeting of Nikita Khrushchev, the then leader of the USSR, with the survived young guardsmen of Krasnodon.

At that meeting, Fadeyev inadequately shouted at Khrushchev in front of all the present calling him names not good at that time and two days later he committed suicide. 
Or else, they committed his suicide, although, of course, such an expression—‘they committed his suicide’—is unacceptable by the norms of the Russian language.

Hence the moral – even the finest structure cannot guarantee you from failure if your pyramid is not made of stone…)
