
When at the end of September Chairman of our School Pioneer Company fell ill, I was sent to the City Pioneer Organization Account Meeting of the Chairmen of School Pioneer Company Councils.

The Meeting was held in the Konotop House of Pioneers in a quiet nook behind the monument to the fallen heroes above the Lenin Street.
According to the regulations, an Account Meeting should have its Chairman and Secretary. 
The Chairman would announce whose turn it was to account and the Secretary would take notes of how much waste paper and scrap metal was collected by the pioneers of the reporting Chairman's school during the accounting period, which cultural events were organized and what places were taken by their pioneers in the city-wide competitions. 
The Pioneer Leader of our school had supplied me with a sheet of paper to be read at the Account Meeting but in the House of Pioneers, I was charged with the additional responsibility of the appointed Chairman of the Meeting. 

They told me that presiding an Account Meeting was as easy as a pie.
All you had to do was to announce ‘now the floor for the accounting report is given to the to Chairman of the Pioneer Company Council from school number such-and-such!’ after which the such-and-such Chairman would rise to the podium on stage with their sheet of the report.
When done with reading, the accounting Chairman would leave the paper to the Secretary of the Meeting – what the point in sticking down all those figures on the fly if they had been already written, right?

At first, everything went without a hitch. 
I and the Secretary of Account Meeting, a girl in a white shirt and the scarlet pioneer necktie as anyone else around, were sitting behind a square table covered with a dark red cloth on a small stage in a small hall, where Chairmen of the City Pioneer Companies were seated in rows waiting for their turn to read their account. 
In the rear of the hall the Second Secretary of the City LYCL Committee—responsible for the work with the pioneers—sat in her red pioneer necktie.
The Chairmen in a well-oiled manner followed each other, read from their sheets, left them by the Meeting Secretary, and returned back to the audience.

I also did my part but after the fourth announcement, something suddenly came over me or rather flooded over me. 
My mouth got overflown with saliva, I barely had time to gulp it, and the salivary glands immediately gave out a new portion.
I felt terribly ashamed before the Secretary sitting next to me.
A spell of ease came when she went to account for School 10 but then the shameful torture continued.
What’s wrong with me after all?!
Then came my turn.
Returning from the rostrum, I swallowed three times – it did not help.
OK, let School 14 finish and…
Oh, no! 
The Second  Secretary too with her final word!. 

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my misfortunes or joys sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you accompanied by the incessant flow lapping of the river named Varanda…) 

In October, the seventh-graders started to prepare for joining the ranks of the All-Union Leninist Young Communist League, aka ALYCL, aka Komsomol.
The Komsomol membership was not a cheap giveaway indiscriminately passed out to lined-up squads or companies. 
Not in the least!
You had to prove that you deserved that high honor at a special sitting of the city, or district Committee of LYCL and the Committee Members would ask you questions as in the examination because on entering this youth organization you became an ally to the Party and future communist.

During the training for acceptance, the Senior Pioneer Leader of our school Volodya Gurevitch—a pretty young man with black hair and bluish cheeks because of the thick but always cleanly shaven bristle—distributed to us, the future members, the Charter of Komsomol printed on small accordion-folding leaflets in the smallest typeface. 
He warned that at the Reception Sitting the Committee Members were especially keen on the Charter Section about the rights and duties of the Komsomol members
Volodya Gurevitch graduated from the prestigious School 11 plus the music school as a button-accordion player.
He lived far from the Plant Settlement, in a block of five-story buildings between the Peace Square and the Square of Konotop Divisions which area folks were, for some reason, calling Palestine. 
At school, he wore mixed paraphernalia from a very clean and ironed pioneer necktie and the badge of the Komsomol member on the chest of his jacket – a small red banner with the golden profile of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin's bald head with his wedge-like beard. 
In the close circle of pioneer activists Volodya Gurevitch, because of the coincidence in the patronymic, often said:
‘Call me simply – Illyich.’
His laugh was hearty and loud and after laughing, his lips did not immediately pull together into the neutral position. 

However, Volodya Sherudillo, a sturdily built champion at ‘bitok' battles with the red turf of hair and a thick scattering of freckles over his round face who studied in our class, in the close circle of us, his classmates, called Volodya Gourevitch: 
‘Khannorik of CEC!’

(...at the dawn of the Soviet regime, before enslaving villagers to collective farms, the Communist leadership experimented with organizing rural population into fellowships of Collective Earth Cultivation, hence – 'of CEC!’
However, the meaning of ‘khannorik’ is not defined even in the multi-volume Dictionary of the Russian Language by Vladimir Dahl, probably, because the linguist never visited the village of Podlipnoye.
Who nowadays remembers CECs?
But the villagers’ memory carefully keeps them and transfers from generation to generation.
Though meaning is forgotten the same remains the feeling…)

Konotop City LYCL Committee was located on the second floor in the right wing of the City Council building.
The building itself, somehow resembling the Smolny Institute from the movies about the October Revolution, stood on the other side of the Peace Avenue opposite the Peace Square. 
Three quiet alleys paved with stone blocks led to it bordered with rows of dark thick chestnuts. 
All the guys from our school successfully passed the examination on the ALYCL Charter and were admitted to the Leninist Young Communist League...

In the autumn they started the construction of tramway into the Plant Settlement under the line of giant poplars along the cobbled Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street.
The pillars of concrete rose between the trees to support the contact wire above the tramway.
By the October holidays, the track rails had passed the Bazaar, our school and even turned into the May Day Street, which stretched to the very end of the Settlement. 
Then three small tramcars started to run from the terminal on the city side of the Under-Overpass to the terminal at the end of May Day Street.
Tramcar conductor-women with plum bags hanging under their breasts collected the fare selling three-kopeck tickets which they tore from the rolls on the canvas strap of their bags. 

In the large trams running in the city the driver had only one cab, in the car head, and reaching the terminal stop the trams went around the turning loop to go back.
The tram line in the Settlement had no such loops at its terminals.
The small tramcars had two cabs like the pushmi-pullyu. 
On coming to the loopless terminal the driver swapped the cabs and went ahead.
At the departure from a terminal, the conductor stood on the step of the back door and pulled the canvas strap tied to the tram arc in order to move it backward for easy sliding along the contact wire above the tramway. 
And then again, the doors in the large city trams slammed automatically by the driver in his cab while the small trams had folding doors on hinges: you pulled the middle handle of the door, pushed the folding leaves aside – open; you pulled the end handle of the door, pushed at the middle handle – closed.
But who needed all that trouble?
So the trams in the Plant Settlement ran with their doors always open unless it was a really severe frost.
To give way to the tram coming in the opposite direction two of the stops had the double track – one by our school and the other in the middle of the May Day Street...

The toilet in the Plant Club was on the first floor – at the very end of a very long corridor starting at the library and going between the blind walls under the bulbs in the ceiling.
In the dark green paint on the walls occasionally happened closed doors with signs ‘Children Sector', ‘Variety Band', ‘Dresser Room' and already near the toilet – ‘Gym'. 
All the doors were constantly locked and kept silence only from behind the gym door sometimes came tap-tapping of the ping-pong ball or iron clang of the barbell plates.
But one day I heard a piano playing and knocked on the door of the Children Sector.

From inside, they yelled me to come in and entering I saw a small dark-skinned woman with a bob-cut black hair and wide nostrils who sat at the piano by the wall of large mirror squares.
In the wall opposite the door there were three windows high above the floor and, beneath them, ballet rails ran over a ribbed heating pipe.
In the left half of the room stood a wide screen of the puppet theater in front of which stretched a long narrow table. 
 And then I said that I’d like to enroll the Children Sector.
‘Very well, let's get acquainted – I'm Raissa Grigoryevna, so who and where from are you?' 

She told me that the former actors grew adult or moved away to other cities and for the revival of the Children Sector I needed to bring my schoolmates with me. 

I started canvassing in my class.
Scully and Kuba were doubtful about the idea of joining the Children Sector but changed their minds when I argued that you could easily play ping-pong on that long table.
Two more girls came to see what it was looking like – Larisa Polosmak and Tanya Krasnozhon.
Raissa Grigoryevna was delighted and we began to prepare a puppet performance ‘Kolobok' based on a fairy tale of the same name. 
She taught us to control simple hand puppets so that they did not duck below the screen out of the onlooker's sight. 

We gathered at the Children Sector twice a week but she sometimes missed the rehearsals or was late and for such occasions left the key in the room of the announcement painters.
We opened the Children Sector and played ping-pong for hours, albeit with a tennis ball, across that long table.
Neither had we bats which were replaced with the covers of the school textbooks and the net was made of the lined-up textbooks as well, the ball knocked them down but the repair didn't take long.

Hard is the actor puppeteer's job: both mentally – you need to copy your character's role and learn it by heart, and physically – you shouldn't ever low down your up-stretched arm with the hand doll. 
During the rehearsals, the arm got numb with the fatigue and even supporting it with the other hand didn't really help. 
And the neck also began to ache because the head was constantly tilted upward to check the actions of the doll.

 
But, on the other hand, after the performance, you would step out and come in front of the screen holding your hand with the doll on it by your shoulder and Raissa Grigoryevna would announce that it was you who played the role of Hare.
You nod your head and the Hare near your shoulder bows too and you hear the laughter and applause from the audience… 
O, thorns! O, sweetness of the glory!. 

Later on, many of the participants dropped out but the core of the Children Section—Scully, Kuba, and I—remained. 
Raissa made of us actors for short performances about the heroic kids and adults from the period of the Revolution or the Civil War.
For the performances, we made up, stuck real theatrical mustache, wore army tunics, rolled cigarettes of shag and newspaper slips the way she taught us and let the smoke in and out of our mouths without inhaling it so as not to cough. 
We went then with those performances to the Plant Shops, to the bigger ones where there were Red Corners to hold meetings, and during the midday break acted on tiny stages before the workers while they were eating their midday meal out of newspaper packages.
They really enjoyed the moment with hand-rolled cigarettes...

Twice a year the Club staged a major amateur concert. 
The Club Director, Pavel Mitrofanovich, recited heartfelt poems dedicated to the Party.
The pupils of Anatoly Kuzko from the button-accordion class played their achievements.
The main highlight of the program, though were the dancing numbers by the Ballet Studio because their teacher Nina Alexandrovna enjoyed a well-deserved reputation that attracted students from all over the city.
Besides, the Club possessed a rich wardrobe so that for the Moldavian dance of Jok the dancers appeared in tight pants and vests shimmering with sparkles, and for the Ukrainian Hopak they wore wide trousers and soft ballet boots of red leather.
The accompaniment to all of them including young girls in ballet tutus provided virtuoso accordionist Aidda standing behind the scenes of the stage.
Next to her stood we in army tunics and adult makeup marveling how classy she played without any sheet music. 
The handsome electrician Murashkovsky sang in duet with the bald tenor, a turner from the Mechanical Shop, the Ukrainian ‘Two Colors of Mine’ and recited rhymed comical humoresques.
On the Murashkovsky’s right hand there were only two fingers – the small one and the thumb and to hide the deficit he clamped a handkerchief in them like with a crab claw.
Two elderly women sang romances not in duet but in turn accompanied by the button-accordion of Anatoly Kuzko himself whose eyes were sooner astray than crossed, one of them looked straight into the ceiling when he was talking to you. 

To conclude the concert, Aksyonov, the blonde Head of the Variety Band, and his musicians came to the stage through the dark of the auditorium.
Their drums and double bass were already waiting there in the small makeup room behind the stage, but his saxophone Aksyonov brought himself. 
Blonde Jeanne Parasyuk, also, by the way, a graduate from our school, performed a couple of popular hits accompanied by the Band and the concert ended with applause and shouts of ‘encore!' 

At those concert was filled to the brim as during most popular two-sequel Indian movie.
The stage was illuminated by spotlights along its edge and from above and even by the beams of searchlights from the two balconies.
Along the dark passage, by the wall of the auditorium, the dancers of the Ballet Studio were trotting to change their stage clothes for following numbers at the Dressing Room of auntie Tanya in the long corridor on the first floor.
For our short performances, Raissa taught us how to appear on the stage from behind the scenes and get out without turning your back to the auditorium and how to look into the hall – not at someone in particular but just so, in general, somewhere between the fifth and sixth rows. 
Although in the sharp light of the searchlight directed into your eyes from the darkness of the hall you couldn’t make out anyone after the fourth row and even those in the first one were very blurred.

So the Club became a part of my life and if I didn’t show up home for a long time after school they didn’t worry – I was hanging out at the Club again...

In the winter evenings, the favorite entertainment among guys was riding the ‘sausage' of the tramcar. 
That was such a tubular grille on the springs under the driver cab.
We ambushed the tram at its stop, went from behind, and when the car started rolling ahead, jumped onto the ‘sausage’ clinging with our fingers to the narrow ledge under the glass of the empty driver cabin.
The ledge was quite smooth, nothing to root your fingers into so you had to strain them and change their position often.

The tram rumbles and rolls and bumps on the rail joints waving the springy ‘sausage’ up and down under your feet – class! 
Wow!
The most high-speed stretch of the track was between the Bazaar and our school.
It was there that once my numb fingers began to slip off the smooth ledge but Scully shouted ‘Hold on!' and pressed them back with his palm, but then Kuba cried ‘Kapets!' for his fingers, too, slipped off and he jumped from the ‘sausage' shooting on at full speed. 
It's good he didn't crash against the trunk of some of the poplar giants. 
But he caught up with us from the darkness while the tram car waited at the stop for the counter-coming one and we went on riding together. 

The entertainment was not for us only but for whole groups of guys of our age.
At times there collected so many sausage-riders that the springy grille began to scrape the rails.
At longer stops, the conductor came down from the car to shoo us off. 
We ran aside into surrounding winter darkness but before the tram gained speed we were back on the grille...

Once instead of lessons, our class was taken for an excursion to the KaPeVeRrZe Plant. 
The Plant Fire Brigade was the first to be visited – it’s not far from the Check-Entrance.
Then they took us to the Shop Floor for Filling Oxygen into cylinder tanks.
In the Smithy, no explanations were audible behind the hum of giant fans and howling of the fire in the brick furnaces. 
Workers were pulling glowing ingots from the furnaces with tremendous tongs and transporting them with telpher cranes onto the anvils of hydraulic hammers.

Our class stood for a while watching as a worker turned with his tongs a big incandescent ingot on the anvil, this and that way, under the mighty strikes of huge puffing hammer shooting from above between its oily stands to shape the desired form.
The hammer bangs sent a tremor through the floor around it. 
Big flakes of metal fell off the workpiece and its color darkened and changed to scarlet, then to dark cherry.
But the most surprising was the sensitiveness of the hammer which could also strike very lightly and even stop halfway in the sharp accelerated fall.
It was operated by a woman in a kerchief on her head with just a pair of levers sticking from the juggernaut frame side.

On our way out of the shop past another, silent hydraulic hammer I saw a scattering of round metal tablets the size of a jubilee ruble only much thicker.
I liked their pleasant lilac color, one of them would do for a good bitok to turn kopecks over in the game for money. 
Besides, they were just a waste for sure, thrown there on the floor.
I picked one up and immediately dropped – it badly burned my fingers.
A passing by worker laughed and said:
‘What? A heavy one, eh?’

And in the Mechanical Shop Floor, I was impressed by a planing machine with a narrow low frame scraping off, in no hurry, shavings from the clamped metal plate. 
The astounding thing about the machine tool was its bas-relief boilerplate – manufactured in Riga in 1904.
From before the revolution!
Still working!

Further along, there stood a large Soviet machine tool, also a planer, the cutter ran long runs and the worker sat next to it in a chair just watching. 
Some nice job, huh?

When I shared at home my impressions from the excursion, Mother said I could take shower at some of the Plant's shop floors instead of going to the City Bathhouse at the Square of Konotop Divisions. 
Didn't I know that Vadya Kubarev's mother worked at the Plant cooling tower? 

I discussed that proposal with Scully and he told that he for a long time already had been going to Plant on his bath days and there were shop floors with better shower rooms than that at the cooling tower. 
The majority of the showers worked only to eight but those in the shop floors with three working shifts were open around the clock.
At check entrances, of course, they might not allow us to the Plant but who cared about going through them?
There remained free access through the rear end of the Plant along the tracks for pulling cars in for repair and pulling the repaired ones out.
Actually, there was no need also to go that far because of the high concrete wall along the Professions Street equipped with a number of convenient stiles for the workers to easily take home shabashka from their workplaces. 

(...and again I have to break out from the consequently flowing time and make a jump from Konotop to Varanda, otherwise, how would a metropolitan woman from the third millennium understand the everyday speech of the last century? 

At times even the Dahl’s Dictionary is of little help.
Although he correctly stated that the word ‘shabash’, aka Sabbath, served as a signal for the end of work but no further revelations.
It took the Russian language another hundred years and living up to the era of developed socialism in the country to derivate ‘shabashka’ from the Sabbath.

Shabashka is something produced at work for use at home or just a bundle of board pieces procured at the workplace for burning in the stove at home.
It is a sort of period put at the end of a working day
How do you estimate my etymological efforts?. 

Well, and since I’m here it’s time, perhaps, to crawl into this one-person Chinese pagoda of mine.
What I like about it are its folding bamboo rods. 
Some cleverly designed gizmo – a dozen half-meter tubes assemble into two three-meter elastic poles to stretch the tent on them.
And this mosquito net at the entrance works fine – zip it up and no mosquito flies in.
Buzz outside, bloodsuckers! 
Fig at you!
Now I’ll take off my shirt and pants, get into this sleeping bag ‘made in Germany’, get warm and all the king’s men can’t make you feel cozier.
It’s good when so an ancient civilization of the East and the most technocratic nation of the West work for you.

Although, if you think about it, they are only manufacturers putting to use the ideas which are the global asset accumulated by all.
Any even the most sophisticated widget in this or that advanced nation is the mutual achievement of the mankind as a whole, and even the Amazonia Indians contributed to it by the mere fact of their existence.
Look at the same zipper: who invented it?
I do not know, but hardly it was the Liang Jin dynasty…) 

The scene is a complex mechanism, in addition to its block system to operate the curtains and the electrical board with lots of fuses and switches for controlling its diverse illumination, high above the stage there is a whole cobweb of metal beams for hanging backs, lamps and side wings. 

During the concerts, we not only stood beside virtuoso Aidda and not only chatted with Moldovan-Ukrainian dancers of the Ballet Studio, who were waiting for their turn to appear on the stage, but also explored the mysterious world of the backstage. 
There was a vertical iron ladder to a short catwalk from which you could climb the beams above the stage and cross them to the other side of the stage with the exactly same catwalk but without the ladder, so retrace your Tarzan-walk you, short-sighted Chung.
But what was there – behind that plank partition that stretched above the stage from one wall to the other?
Aha! The attic above the auditorium!

So the plan for the creation of a personal entrance to the film shows had matured – through the attic to the catwalk, from there to the stage, wait until the lights go off, dive under the screen and you were in the auditorium! 

On the first floor of the Club, next to the painters' room there was an unlocked door always ajar to the Plant grounds and we had learned long ago that a solid iron staircase led to the roof of the Club with a dormer allowing an easy access to the attic. 

Kuba, for some reason, did not want to participate leaving it to me and Scully to carry out the plan. 
One dark winter evening, taking the ax from the Scully’s shed, we penetrated the Plant grounds via one of many stiles over the concrete wall.
Without delay or any obstruct we approached the Club building, climbed to the attic and looked around.

It was an extensive space with some iron circle-fencing in the middle.
Lifting its lid we saw the slits in the sheet metal of its round bottom and guessed that it was from where the huge chandelier with garlands of glass hung into the auditorium.
Out of the slits sounded automatic guns bursts and explosions – a movie about the war favored the execution of our not absolutely legitimate intentions.
The electric torchlight showed the cinder layer under our feet sneaking to the place where the attic was crossed by the plank partition. 
We approximately determined the location of the catwalk on the other side of it and proceeded to carefully split the boards in order to break through them.

The boards turned out to be thick and stubborn, besides, we had to stop the work in the lulls between the combat actions below.
Only after cutting through one of the boards we realized the major problem we ran into – the partition was made of two plank layers with a layer of sheet iron between them.
Thus we failed to cut a manhole to get through to the magnificent world of the art of motion pictures.
The builders of yore knew their job, take my word for it…

And pretty soon it turned out that the whole plan had no sense at all because Raissa taught us to take pass-checks from Director of the Club.

About six in the evening Pavel Mitrofanovich, as a rule, was already jolly screwed and when one of the Children Sectorians appeared in his office with a humble petition, he tore off a slip from a sheet of paper on his desk and, snuffling his nose, illegibly wrote on it ‘let in 6 (six) people’ or any other number of people who wished to the show that day.
Below he added an ornate signature running half a line.
When the show began, we went up to the second floor and handed the precious scrap of paper to auntie Shura.
And she unlocked the treasured door to the balconies suspiciously checking if our quantity coincided with the hieroglyphics in the pass-check.

Director of the Club was short and thickset but not pot-bellied.
His slightly swollen, often reddish face had a concordant addition of grayish hair with a natural wave which he combed back.
When the Club workers prepared with the participation of the Plant workers the full-length performance of the play ‘At the Advantageous Place’ by Ostrovsky, Director just parted his hair in the middle of his head, pomaded it and turned out a real Tsar-times Merchant for the play.
The electrician Murashkovsky played the role of Landowner and appeared on stage in a white Circassian coat and in his claw of the disfigured hand, instead of a handkerchief he constantly held a riding whip. 

Even Head of the Children Sector, Eleonora Nikolayevna, partook in the full-length production of the Ostrovsky’s play.

Apparently, the position of Head was higher than that of Artistic Director because Eleonora came to the Children Sector much more rarely than Raissa. 
And she always appeared in long earrings with tiny shining sparklers and in immaculate white blouses with lace collars, and her hands' movements were mannerly retarded, in contrast to the energetic gesticulation of Raissa. 

The only time I saw Eleonora without those hanging earrings was in the one-act play where she was acting the underground communist caught by the White Guards.
The Whites put her into one prison cell with a criminal acted by Raissa and Eleonora converted her into a Communist supporter before they took her away to the execution... 

When Director was not in his office I had no other option but to buy a ticket from the ticket office next to his locked door.
On one of such occasions, I got seated in a row in front of two girls, my classmates – Tanya and Larissa. 
Earlier I had secretly liked Tanya but she seemed to be too unattainable I switched over to courting Larissa.
After the classes, I tried to catch up with her in the Nezhin Street because she also went home that way. 
However, she always was with Tanya, her close girl-friend, and neighbor. 
When Larissa was a participant of Children Sector I once saw her along the Professions Street to the corner of the Gogol Street because she did not allow to see her home.
At that period Tanya also participated in Children Sector and there, actually, were three of us going along the Professions Street.
Tanya kept prodding Larissa to walk faster but then got angry and went ahead alone.

Two of us parted at the corner of the Gogol Street and I went along it to the Nezhin Street enthusiastically recollecting how sweetly laughed Larissa in response to my silly yakety-yak.
On reaching the ice-coated water pump under the lamppost at the corner my enthusiasm evaporated.
Two black figures sharply contrasting against the white snow called me.
I recognized both – one was a guy from the parallel class and the other tenth-grader Kolesnikov from our school. They lived somewhere in the Maruta Street.
In a privately threatening tone, Kolesnikov began to make me understand that if I ever would come up to Larissa again and if he heard or be told that I dared then, well, in general, did I understand what he would do to me?
And he kept repeating those general concepts in a circle with slight variations in the order of priority when I suddenly felt something snatching me at the calf. 
I thought that was a street dog and looked back but there was only a snow drift and nothing else.
At that moment, the meaning of the idiom ‘hamstring shaking with fear’ came to me completely.
He asked again if I understood and I muttered that I understood.
He asked if I understood everything.
I said that, yes, everything.
But I didn't look at their faces and thought how good it would be if Uncle Tolik, the former regional welterweight champion in weightlifting, came to the pump for water… 
No, he did not come. 
In the morning of that day, I had brought enough water to our hutta... 

And now, before the full auditorium, I sat in front of the two girls, my classmates, aware of all the imprudence of such an act, but unable to behave differently.
I turned to them and tried to start a talk in the general hum of the filled hall.
But Larissa was silent and looked aside and only Tanya gave one-syllable answers until Larissa turned to me:
‘Don’t follow me, the guys are sneering at me because of you.’
I did not find anything to answer with, silently I rose to my feet and walked along the blind wall to the exit, carrying the splinters of the broken heart in my chest. 
When I was reaching the last rows my black sadness drowned in complete darkness – the lights went out to start the movies.
To let my eyes get accustomed to the dark I took an empty seat at the row end and stopped suffering because it was "Winnitoo the Chief of Apaches'!. 

 In Number 19 in the Nezhin Street, the old man Duzenko was no more, that part of the hutta was already dwelt by two old women – Duzenko's widow and her sister who moved there from her village. 
And in the half belonging to Ignat Pilluta remained only Pillutikha.
She never stuck her nose from her hutta and the window shutters looking into the Nezhin Street at times did not open for weeks.
She, surely, visited the Bazaar or the Nezhin Store but my paths never overlapped with hers.

In February Grandma Katya was suddenly taken to the hospital.
Perhaps, only for me, with my life filled with school, Club, books, and TV it happened suddenly.
Trying to get everywhere leaves no time to see things around you.

Coming from school I clinked the wicket latch-hook and ran up our porch past Pillutikha’s window in which was seen her profile cloaked with a loose black kerchief and her hand stretched up in the direction of the wall between her and our kitchens.
At home, I threw the folder with school books and notebooks into the crevice between the folding sofa and the cabinet under the TV and went back to the kitchen to have a midday meal with my brother and sister if they hadn't yet had it. 
Mother and Aunt Luda cooked separately for their families and Grandma Katya ate their meal from her younger daughter, together with Irochka and Valerik, at the same kitchen table by the wall between our and Duzenko's parts of the hutta. 

In the daytime the television was showing nothing but the screen with a circle and squares for adjusting the image with small knobs at the back of the TV box, if the circle was uneven then the announcers’ faces would be flattened or too long.
That’s why until five o’clock the TV was turned off and the midday meal was eaten under the muffled drum-roll-like chant behind the wall to the Pillutikha’s which at times turned into indistinct shrieks.
Then I went to the Club and coming back again saw Pillutikha backlit from a distant bulb light in the room.
She never turned the light on in the kitchen where she stood against the wall.

After all the four parents of our hutta returned from work, Pillutikha would add the volume.
Father's comment was:
‘Ew! That Goebbels again at her hurdy-gurdy!’
One time Uncle Tolik put a large teacup to the wall to hear what she was croaking about.
I also pressed my ear to the cup bottom – the chant got nearer and sounded already not behind the wall but in the white cup but remained as thick as before.

Mother advised not to pay attention to the half-witted old woman and Aunt Luda explained that Pillutikha was putting curses on all of us through the wall. 
She turned to that same wall and answered:
‘And all of that back to your bosom!’

I don’t know whether Pillutikha was really crazy.
She managed to live alone after all.
By the end of the war, her daughter left Konotop for the safety sake – not to be twitted for her cheerful behavior with the officers of the German Company Headquarters lodging in their hutta. 
Her son Grisha was doing his ten-year stretch in prison for some murder.
Pilluta died.
No TV in her hutta.
Probably, she kept cursing so as not to go nuts.
