
The Grandma Katya didn’t say anything about Pillutikha and only smiled a guilty smile.
On some days she moaned occasionally but hardly louder than the muffled Goebbels’s speech behind the wall...

And suddenly the ambulance arrived and she was taken to the hospital.

Three days later they brought Grandma Katya back and put on the leatherette-covered mattress-couch, constructed from the remains of the Object's sofa, in the kitchen under the window, opposite to the brick stove. 
She did not recognize nor spoke to anyone and only moaned loudly.

In the evening our two families gathered in front of the TV and closed the door to the kitchen to cut off her moans and heavy smell.
The Arkhipenkos moved their beds to the room and it became a bedroom for nine.

Next day the ambulance was called again but they did not take her away and only made an injection.
Grandma Katya quieted for a short time but then again began to swerve from side to side on the couch, repeating the same screams;
‘Oh, God! Ah, probby!’
A few years later I guessed that ‘probby’ was from the shortened Ukrainian ‘forgive me, God’.

Grandma Katya was dying for three days.
Our families stayed at neighbors’ huttas.
The Arkhipenkos at Number 15 and we at 21 in the half of Ivan Kreepak. 

Adult neighbors were giving our parents indistinct advice about breaking out the threshold to our hutta or some of the floorboards inside it. 
The most common sense proposal made Ivan Kreepak’s wife, auntie Tamara.
She said that the couch with Grandma Katya stood under the window with a half-open leaf and the fresh air protracted her suffering.

The same evening, Mother and Aunt Luda dropped into our hutta, grabbed more blankets, put out the light and got out onto the porch. 
There Aunt Luda neared the kitchen window and tightly closed the leaf.
Then she stealthily stepped down to Mother and me—I was holding the blankets—with a smile of a naughty girl on her face, or so it seemed in the dark moonless night. 


In the morning Mother woke us sleeping on the floor in the Kreepak’s hutta with the news that Grandma Katya had died.
The funeral was the next day.
I did not want to go, but Mother said I should.
I was burning with shame.
It seemed to me that everyone knew that Grandma Katya was suffocated by their daughters.
So I let the ear-flaps of my rabbit-fur hat loose and pushed it over my eyes.
And so I went all the way from our hutta to the cemetery hanging my guilty head and looking at the feet of those who walked ahead of me.
Though nobody might ever have guessed I did it out of shame because a strong wind was whipping my face with icy pellets. 

At the cemetery when a trumpet shrilly cried over the mound of snow mixed with black earth lumps all Grandma Katya's children were sobbing: Mother, and Aunt Luda and even Uncle Vadya. 

(...living on we irreversible grow harder and harder, someday I’ll turn into an iron cracker from the worn-out scrip of the wanderer searching for her beloved Finist the Radiant Falcon…)


The news of the Yuri Gagarin death struck us though not so tragically as the death of Vladimir Komarov eleven months before him – getting harder we had learned that astronauts were also mortal. 
The TV announcer, keeping his eyes down to the sheet of text on his desk, read that while in a training flight on a jet plane, Gagarin together with his partner-pilot Seryogin crashed when approaching the airfield.
Then he looked up through his black-rimmed glasses and declared the All-Union mourning.

When a person reads from a sheet of paper it does not mean that they hide their eyes because of shame, it's just their job, otherwise how else would we know the news? 

Shortly before Gagarin's death, I heard in the gossip of the adults that he was not so an irreproachable hero, after all; he became self-conceited, and he cheated his wife. 
That scar on his right eyebrow appeared after the jump from his lover’s flat on the second floor.

(...but who’s interested in those rumors today, be they true or not?
For my son Ashot, and for all his generation, Gagarin is just a name from a history textbook, as for me was, say, Marshal Tukhachevsky.
Orbited Earth? Good job. 
Executed by a firing squad? Bad luck. 

Yet for me Gagarin is not a textbook but a part of my own life and, as long as I’m alive, I am interested to find out what happened, how and why.
And digging for the facts it’s difficult not to fall in love with the search engines of the Internet…

Vladimir Komarov knew that he would not return alive from his space flight because his backup, Yuri Gagarin, inspecting the spaceship Voskhod found two hundred technical faults which he listed in a written report of ten pages.
He passed the report through his higher commanders to Leonid Brezhnev, the then leader of the USSR.
The commanders held the report by them, they knew that Brezhnev wouldn’t change the launch date, not to allow the Americans to overtake the Soviet Union in the space flights race.
Komarov could refuse to go to his death, but then the doomed spaceship would be manned with his backup and personal friend, Gagarin. 
In the morning of the launch, Gagarin appeared at the launch pad wearing an astronaut's space suit and demanded that he be sent instead of Komarov but he was not listened to. 

After the burial of Komarov's ashes in the Kremlin wall, next to the ashes of Marshal Malinovsky, Gagarin's behavior towards his superiors became extremely defiant and uncontrolled. 
According to unconfirmed rumors, at one of the government banquets, Gagarin splashed his glass of vodka into Brezhnev's face. 
Americans do not believe in the plausibility of such an incident not because they are stupid but simply because they have different grammar. 
In the Russian language ‘mother’ and ‘death’ are of the same grammatical gender so that for a Russian mujik, consciously or unconsciously, there is something in common between the two.
 Well, how to plausibly translate ‘Death-Mommy’ for Americans if they have got only ‘Mr. Death’?
Not anything fits into my head until I feel it…
As a result, they shove an anti-tank mine under their belt and with the cry ‘Try bearing me back, Mom!' throw themselves under the tank trucks… 

Go and rack your brains over the mystery of the Russian soul.
The solution is in the language...


Gagarin was not expelled from the Cosmonaut Detachment – he belonged to the entire Planet already.
He attended the classes, flew jets in training flights.
Did he know that the countdown for his end had been set to ticking?
I think, he did.
Cosmonauts were selected not only for physical but mental fitness as well.
He did not only know where and when...


On March 27, 1968, Yuri Gagarin was killed in a plane crash near the village of Novosyolovo, Kirzhach District, Vladimir Region.
The morning was foggy, the training flight on a MIG jet was over there remained a couple of minutes to the airfield at the altitude of five hundred meters when from the low clouds the SU jet dropped down, though according to the flights plan for that morning it was supposed to fly at the altitude of fourteen kilometers in a completely different direction. 
Controlled by an experienced test pilot, the huge, in comparison to the training aircraft, SU jet flashed by next to the MIG preparing for landing.
The MIG, captured by turbulence, twirled like a sliver in the breaker, entered a tailspin and collapsed into the forest.
The sound of the explosion reached the airfield.

Let him who has ears hear.

Fadeyev – Khrushchev; Gagarin – Brezhnev.

Let him who understands realize…

But I again got carried away and in the narration about myself there popped up perfect strangers with whom I have never met in my life and only now started to understand that they are also a part of me.
Okay, I stop showing off what a clever guy I am and return to the twentieth century, year sixty-eight, when I am in my fifteenth year and…)

And it is simply outrageous that those Czechs had succumbed to the CIA subversive propaganda and started a counterrevolution in the fraternal camp of the socialist countries.
And they inhumanely blocked the way to our tank with baby carriages and the tank driver turned off in case there were babies inside and died when the tank fell off the bridge. 
So reported the TV news program ‘Time'. 
Then, of course, the Czech Communist Party restored the order in their country with the help of a military contingent from the fraternal states and we started to live on... 

By the way, in those times Konotop surpassed many of the larger cities in the development of television because we had two channels on TV. 
The first was the Central Television, with the news program ‘Time’, and the New Year entertainment program ‘The Tiny Light’, and the Club of Jolly and Resourceful, aka CJR, and the hockey.
Channel Two was the Konotop TV studio that broadcast only in the evening when people were home from work, but it showed movies oftener than on the Central Television. 

Since there were no color TVs around, Father drew a sheet of transparent isinglass over the TV screen. 
The sheet had certain shades in some of its parts – the upper part blue for the sky, the lower one green for the grass.
They say that through that isinglass the announcers' faces looked of more natural color than without it. 
I could not discern such subtleties although never considered myself colorblind.

Such mica became a fashion throughout Konotop and Uncle Tolik brought the sheet for our TV from the Repair Base, aka RepBase, where he worked on a milling machine. 
At the RepBase, they renovated military choppers so had to have a better notion of such isinglass matters. 

The TV channels were changed by clicking the big turn switch under the screen.
However, in the daytime, both the Central Television and the City TV Studio channel showed only the mute tuning circle and when clicking outside those two you had sizzling coarse-grained ‘snow' and jumping streaks of white. 
And (coming back to the available two channels) every day exactly at three, the technicians of Konotop TV Studio switched on music for thirty minutes: ‘Nocturne’ by Tariverdiyev, songs performed by Valery Obodzinsky or Larissa Mondrus – against the background of that same tuning circle.
We—Sasha, Natasha, and I—always switched TV at that time to listen to the music, although the records rarely changed and we knew beforehand which song would follow that or another number.

Besides, Konotop had a wealth of independent underground radio stations that went on air in the mid-wave range. 
There was both ‘The King of the Cemetery’ for you, and ‘Caravel’, and whichever name one would choose to call his station.
Their weak point was their irregularity.
You did not know when to switch the receiver to hear:
‘Hello to all, ‘The Stickman’ radio station is on air. Who hears me, confirm...’
And he put on the hoarsely roaring Vysotsky songs about the Archer who disgraced the Tsar, or how we shoot through space in a spaceship, and about dolphin's belly ripped open by a propeller… 
At some point, the radio station ‘Charming Nina' intervened and began to point out to ‘The Stickman' that he had sat on another guy's wave band and that ‘Charming Nina' had been airing in that particular range for no less than a week. 
And they began to quarrel: 
‘Don't swell too much! Look out, if I catch you at the Peace Square you'll have two blobs instead your ears!' 
‘Hey, you! Mini-willie! Who do you roll a barrel on? Haven’t had wet pants for a whole week?’
‘The more you rant the more you’ll weep!’
‘Close it up!’
But they never switched to four-letter words.
 
Father said even our receiver could be converted into a radio station in a flash if only there was a microphone.
But to all my and Scully’s wheedling to convert it and we’d get a mic somewhere, he refused curtly because it was radio hooliganism and special vehicles were stalking the city to track those hooligans down, and fine them and confiscate all the radio equipment from their hutta, down to the TV box.
We didn't want to lose our TV, didn't we? 

At times those radio-hooligans instead of wished-for Vysotsky songs started endless negotiations about who had which capacitor and which diodes he’d trade it for.
Finally, they agreed to meet at the Peace Square.
‘How do I know you?’
‘Don’t care. I know you. I’ll come up.’
And we fall back to the TV tuning circle, to the hundred times heard but more reliable Obodzinsky. 

The Peace Square in front of the movie theater of the same name was rimmed with long five-story apartment blocks.
The large fountain in its center furnished with a low round wall of granite was turned on once in two years to shoot up a high white jet of water. 
From the wide stone porch steps of the movie theater to the far corners of the square stretched asphalt beams of walks, beautiful chestnut trees lined the walks and the corner-to-corner pavement along the Peace Avenue.
The lawns under the trees had a couple of additionally trampled short-cuts and in the alleys, as well as by the fountain there occasionally stood long benches of paint-coated wooden beams. 

In the warm evening, the square filled up with the ‘whore-promenade’.
Dense waves of loungers leisurely walked the alleys without leaving the square and only circled it time after time watching the faces and clothes of the like counter-flow or of those lucky ones who got seated on the benches.
The alleys asphalt was covered with the soft carpet of husk, which was denser in front of the benches because both the circulating and sitting people ceaselessly chewed black seeds spitting out the inedible husk.

Sometimes I also went along with the lounging stream towards the tram stop after the end of a movie show.
It happened not so often though because from one sequel of ‘Fantômas’ to another you had to wait at least six months.

In the afternoon, the benches were mostly empty, though one time I and Kuba were called from one of them by a pair of young grown-up idlers who demanded kopecks from us.
Kuba began to assure that we had no money with us, but I suggested; 
‘Take all that falls out!’
With those words, I pulled out the left pocket in my pants and dusted the pocket bag hanging inside-out with my hand. 
I did not bother with the right pocket though because there were ten kopecks for a tram.
The guy looked around and promised to beat me up, but he didn’t rise from the bench.
We went on and Kuba upbraided me for stupid impudence which could too easily end in having my silly mug punched which I deserved.
Probably, he was right and I just didn’t envision such an outcome, carried away with the idea of making a fine gesture – to pull out an empty pocket.
What saved me?
The rogue might have decided that I was under the protection of some guy with a pull among the thieves, otherwise, why would I be so recklessly insolent? 

‘Enters Sehrguey Ogoltsoff from Konotop!’ announced Raissa when Scully and I entered the Children Sector room.
Seeing that I couldn't catch up with the humor, she handed me The Pioneer magazine opened at the page with a story, under which it stood in a black bold typeface: ‘Sehrguey Ogoltsoff, the city of Konotop'. 

I had already forgotten how, last fall, I sent two notebook pages about my conversation with a dwarf to the fantasy story contest announced by the magazine.
There we discussed some trifles while I was dozing off.
And suddenly – here you are!
How sweetly smelt the pages of typography print in the fresh magazine issue! 

My legs kind of weakened and I felt a soft blow to the back of my head but somehow from the inside.
I sat down in one of the triple-complected auditorium seats put along the ballet rail under the window and read the publication in which there was almost nothing left of what I had sent to the contest.
And the dwarf spoke of certain filmmaker Ptushko I had never heard of.
However, neither in Children Sector nor at home had I ever shared with anyone that most of the story was not written by me – after all, not every day your story is printed in a thick monthly magazine.

When the summer came Mother grew fat and Father started somewhat guiltily asking us—their children—what about having one more brother?
We could call the babe Alyoshka, huh?
Natasha wrinkled her nose, Sasha stayed silent as well and I shrugged and said; 
‘What for?’
The addition to the family seemed to be awkward not because of deterioration of living conditions but of the too big age difference between the parents and the prospective baby.

Father dropped the subject and never picked it up again.
A couple of weeks later I accidentally heard Mother talking to Aunt Luda:
‘I used the pill and then they brought the barrels of beer to the stall, I rolled them in and – that’s it.’
So there was no change in numbers of our generation of Konotop Ogotsoffs, and Mother remained fat forever. 

Her stall stood in the central alley of the Central Park opposite the Peace Square.
It looked like a round hut under a tin roof.
The sheet-metal door on behind had a heavy padlock and the trade was conducted through a window with a square ledge-counter above the asphalt of the path under the trees.
Besides the draft beer in dark wooden barrels to which, in turn, was inserted a hose with a fastening to run the beer up to the faucet by the window, the goods included also packaged cookies, two-three sorts of cheap candies, packs of cigarettes, lemonade in bottles, wire boxes with bottled fruit-and-berry ‘White Strong’ wine, the Georgian ‘Rkatseteli’, and a wine of unknown origin named ‘Riesling’ which was so awfully hard to sell out.

‘White Strong' was selling like hotcakes because of its price – one ruble and two kopecks for a half-a-liter bottle. 
Cigarettes also did not linger for long but the main engine of the trade remained beer.
When there was a delivery delay and they did not bring beer barrels from the Trade Base of Workers Provision Department, aka ORS, Mother began to sigh that the monthly plan for her stall would not be done with the consequent cuts to her salary. 

My life rolled on along its tracks and those tracks somehow bypassed the City Central Park although my sister and brother occasionally boasted of dropping to Mother's workplace for free lemonade. 
Yet, one time I spent in the stall almost a whole day because of the secret service agent Alexander Belov.

In those abysmally old times, it was impossible to subscribe to ‘The Novel-Gazette' monthly. 
The magazine justified its name, it was printed on inexpensive newsprint and in two columns per page but its thickness was on a par with the ‘Pioneer’ or ‘The Youth’ monthlies.
Albeit absent from the subscription lists at the post offices, ‘The Novel-Gazette’ could still be found at libraries or by some lucky person who had borrowed it from the previous lucky beggar.
If a novel was too long for one issue it was to be continued in the following month.
Well, at times, deviating from the magazine title, they printed collections of stories or (quite rarely) poems, but no more than a couple of authors per issue.

So, getting the word of mouth that in ‘The Novel-Gazette' they had published ‘The Shield and Sword' by Vadim Kozhevnikov I hurried to the Club Library and was told that all the three issues were already lent out and they had put together the queue-list of those wishing to borrow the masterpiece. 

When Mother told that one of her colleagues gave her ‘The Shield and Sword’ for a couple of days, the rails of my accustomed life tracks at once swung around towards her stall where I arrived the next day soon after the opening.

First chapters I read in the stall sitting on a wire box with empty bottles, then I got smart enough to move over to a nearby bench returning only to exchange the issues or sit in Mother's place while she went to the park toilet, and even sold something. 
By the end of the day, I lived through the career of the Soviet intelligence officer Belov, aka Johann Weiss, from a private of the German Wehrmacht to an officer at the Abwehr intelligence service. 

The trade during that day was rather sluggish because the stall had run out of beer and the empty barrels piled up outside by the back door.
However, with the onset of twilight when I moved back to the stall to finish reading of the last issue under a dim bulb hanging from the ceiling, at the very end of the Second World War, the flow of buyers began to increase.
That’s it...
And I stacked all the three magazine issues on a box near the door.

The trickle of customers turned into a line thickly crowding before the outside counter.
The growth of hands held up rose over it with crumpled rubles and handfuls of kopecks. 
Mother said:
‘Wait a little. I close in half an hour. We’ll go home together.’
I sat leaning my back against the door so as not to be in the way for her taking goods from here and there. 
Half an hour later the flurry by the stall in the park alley did not subside.
‘Maman! A pair of the Strong Blondes and a small one of cookies!’
‘Auntie! Auntie! A pack of ‘Prima’!’
‘Sister! A bottle of white!’
‘White is over.’
‘And over there? In that box?' 
‘It's Rkatsiteli – a ruble and thirty-seven.' 
‘Alright, come on! Let it be it, we’re not racists!’

Finally, the Georgian was over too, the crowd dissolved.
Mother dropped the window shutter but had to open again for a latecomer trotting up along the dark alley.
From grief that everything's sold out he bought a bottle of expensive incomprehensible Riesling for a ruble seventy-eight, though it already was thirty minutes past the allowed hours for selling alcohol. 
When Mother locked the stall and we walked to the tram stop at the Peace Square I asked if such a mayhem was there every evening.
‘No, Seryozha. It’s because of it's Sunday today.'

And in the summer the Kandeebynno awaited us again, but now, apart from swimming trunks and a sandwich with melted cheese we had to not forget a deck of cards.
‘Whose move?’
‘Yours.’
‘No cheating?’
‘Take your eyes off your shoes! It's Scully who's been dealing!' 
‘Labor made Ape into Man... Here, two Knaves to Kuba.’
‘Labor made Man into Cart-Horse... Queen and Ace of the suit.’

On each beach blanket spread between the currant bushes heated battles of ‘throw-in fool' went on to the music from portable radios. 

The most enviable one, of course, was Spidola, the make of Riga Radio plant, the size of a notebook and no thicker than a brick. 
The telescopic antenna was hidden in its plastic case leaving just button-like top outside. 
Pulling that button you obtained the nickel-plated fishing rod for catching short waves.
The long and medium waves were received without extending the antenna.

Catching radio stations on short waves was a hopeless occupation though.
Half of the range was drowning in sizzling, hissing, and crackling because of ours were deafening all those ‘voices’ in the service of the CIA:
‘The Voice of America’, ‘Liberty’, ‘Russian Service of BBC’
So on the beach, everybody listened to the ‘Mayak' – the All-Union Radio Station, which broadcast signals of the exact time and short news account every half hour and the rest of the air was filled with concerts at the requests of radio listeners. 

But it's better not to go to the Kandeebynno alone and not only because you'd stay without partners for card-playing but merely for security reasons. 

Once, not paying attention to the warnings from Kuba and Scully, I swam across the Kandeebynno to the low dam of fish lakes. 
A group of guys of my age was there on the bank.
One of them asked me in Ukrainian:
‘Have you seen Peka?’
‘Who’s Peka?’ asked I in reply and got a sucker punch into the chin.
They all dived from the bank and swam away.
It did not really hurt, but distressed.
Probably, the blades from Zagrebellya.
And what, if one were allowed to ask, did I do to them?

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my misfortunes or joys sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you lying in a tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lapping of the river named Varanda…)

The Kandeebynno was not the only place for beach going in Konotop.
Let’s take, for instance, the gully filled with water in the middle of the field beyond the Settlement.
Sometimes its grassy banks were overcrowded, even the guys from the City came there.
And the three of us a couple of times went by our bicycles to the river of Yezooch in the diagonally opposite outskirts of Konotop. 

The flow was almost none – unnoticeable as if the river fell asleep under thick willows along the grassy banks. 
And it was deep indeed, there even stood a tower for high diving made of iron pipes.
It had three levels – one, three and five meters high. 
We climbed the ladder to the three-meter level but it took some time to pluck the heart for a dive.
And even then it was not a headlong dive but a heel-first jump. 
Then we proceeded onto the five-meter platform but having looked at the water too far down retract lower in silence.
Even Kuba.

Leaving already, we saw an adult in a nice ‘swallow-like’ dive from the highest level.
The only drawback of Yezooch was its lack of beach-goers.
There was no one except for us and the lonely diver.

And the most popular place for summer recreation of Konotopers was, of course, the sandy beach of the Bay on the Seim river – just two stops from the Station by a suburban train.
But that summer I didn't go there. 
Not because the ticket cost twenty kopecks, you could go there as a hidden traveler, aka ‘hare'. 
The crowd of Seim-goers was so thick that the conductors couldn’t squeeze through all the cars in ten minutes.
And not because every summer the river of Seim reaped a grim harvest of two or three drownings – young guys, who were then buried with a crowded funeral.
I was not afraid of that because nothing of the kind could ever happen to me. 
The reason was that everybody went to the Seim on weekends – the days when Uncle Tolik and I were fishing.
Although a couple of times we dropped over to the Bay Beach—just so along the way, with the fishing rods hitched to the ‘Jawa’ trunk.

Once we even had an overnight stay one kilometer away from the Beach.
That was when Uncle Tolik’s brother, Vitya, came from the regional center, the city of Sumy to propose to Natasha from Number 15 in the Nezhin Street where the Arkhipenkos stayed while Grandma Katya was dying.
Vitya was not balding like his elder brother — Uncle Tolik when proposing to Aunt Luda.
No, Vitya's hair was all in place – light brown, combed straight back as in the style of young blades at the end of the fifties'. 
He was already over thirty, but then auntie Natasha from Number 15 was not a young girl either.
On the other hand, the whole hutta and the garden at Number 15 belonged to her and her two parents. 

That Saturday Uncle Tolik and I also came with the fishing rods to stay overnight on the Seim bank and the next day to go fishing. 
But auntie Natasha’s father hadn’t brought yet the partakers in the away-night to the appointed place by his ‘Moscvitch’ car.
To pass the time, Uncle Tolik and I went to the pioneer camp in a pine forest, about half a kilometer from the Bay. 
And while Uncle Tolik rode away somewhere else – ‘there, not too far off’, I watched a movie in the open-air camp cinema.
'A Million Years B.C.' was a classy film about Tumak banished by his black-haired tribe and a tribe of blondes accepted him because he had piled a dinosaur and save a small blonde child. 
When the movie ended Uncle Tolik came back from his ‘not too far off’ and warned me to tell, when asked, that we were watching the movie together.

We returned to the appointed place where auntie Natasha’s father had already brought her, and Aunt Luda with Irochka, and auntie Natasha’s groom Vitya with his and Uncle Tolik’s third brother.
They had already set up a tent, behind which loomed the car of ‘Moscvich’, and built a small fire in front of the tent.

I went down to the sandspit under the steep riverbank and touched the flowing water.
It was so warm that I couldn’t resist and went into the river.
I did not dive, or swim and only wandered, hither and thither, along the smooth sandy bottom by the bank.
Then Vitya and his bride came down too.
He wanted to swim, despite her persuasions not to, and I returned to the fire to dry up and it was already dark around.
Then I crawled to the edge of the high bank over the river and looked down.
Against the background of the stars glinting in the river flow, two silhouettes kissed each other – so romantic. 
Perhaps, my head also was seen from below against the starry sky because Vitya cried out ‘bitch!’ and flung his arm.
Invisible in the dark pebble hit me on the forehead.
I shouted ‘Missed!’ and rolled away from the edge.
Of course, I lied if it had missed it would not hurt so much.

When the romantic pair came back to the fire, Vitya asked me:
‘Do you know what ‘fingertips’ are?’
I said I did not and he told me to stand up and, when I did, he put his fist to my chin and threw me to the ground with the sharp push of his fist.
‘That’s what the ‘fingertips’ are’, said he.
Lying next to the fire I said:
‘Vitya, my friend Kuba is in the habit of saying “Doctor doesn’t take offense at the sick”’.
But I felt hurt all the same.
