
The women and the small Irochka slept in the car and all the rest inside the tent.
In the morning Uncle Tolik and I went to another place to fish but the catch was quite useless – not enough to feed a cat.
I didn't see Vitya anymore because his wedding with auntie Natasha took place in the city of Sumy and they stayed to live there... 

In the middle of the summer, in the middle of a week, and even in the middle of the working day Uncle Tolik unexpectedly came home from work. 
‘Fetch the fishing rods, quick!’ shouted he from the doorway.
While hitching them to the ‘Jawa’ trunk he announced that the dam of the Kandeebynno fish breeding lakes had broken through and all the fish fled to the Yezooch river.
We rode across all of the city, crossed the bridge to Zagrebellya and Uncle Tolik, slowing down, drove along the bank of Yezooch in search of a free place for fishing.

There was almost no place left.
Along both banks of Yezooch men and boys with fishing rods and poles were standing in continuous rows throwing hooks, pulling them out with or without flashing prey. 
It was a spontaneous day off.
It was the demonstration of Konotop fishing forces.

(...up to now I am not absolutely sure: was the breakthrough of the fish breeding lakes somehow connected with the Crazy Summer '68 in France, or was the then revolutionary situation there a result of the Kandeebynno events?
Though both might, probably, have been related to some other but undoubtedly mutual cause…)

A few days later Scully and I went to the Kandeebynno on foot.
The fish lakes stretched like a vast field covered with the dingy crust of half-dry mud. 
Occasional green algae spots were still seen here and there.
In one of such spots, there was a shallow but long pit full of live fish. 

We were picking them out with bare hands.
Not very large fish though, about twenty centimeters.

Scully had a mesh-bag with him but I had to take off my tank top and tied it with a knot from below so that I could carry the catch.
At home they fried the fish, it was enough for both families and even Zhulka had his share.
Aunt Luda teased Uncle Tolik that he had never brought such a catch from his fishing.

Summer’s the time of repair and reconstruction.
Father cut a hole in the dead wall of the kerogas section of the veranda and inserted a small frame with a glazed leaf on hinges. 
The daylight came to the section and made it more comfortable and no need to switch on the bulb every entering time.

Then came the kitchen's turn.
One Sunday everything was taken out of it into the yard except for the too heavy refrigerator by the door.
On the same day, Mother and Aunt Luda whitewashed all the walls, ceiling and the brick stove.
They worked until finished and it was too late for bringing things in, they just washed the floor in the kitchen and everybody had to spent the night in our room. 

Natasha yielded her folding bed to Irocnka and Valerik, and she returned to her old place at the end of the couch shared by Sasha and me.
The middle of the room was occupied by the thick mattress from the bed of the Arkhipenkos parents and there remained no place – you had to watch where to step.
Sasha and I were already in bed, with our legs bent up, as Aunt Luda decided to take a dip in the kitchen while everyone else was watching TV. 
She brought from the yard the mirror in the rectangular wooden frame and hang it on its nail above the fridge.
Then she poured hot water into a big tin basin for washing and pulled together the striped curtains in the doorway between the kitchen and the room. 

The light in the room was switched off in order to better see the TV screen and the volume decreased but I, all the same, muttered that I could not sleep with the sound on. 
And I got the usual answer:
‘Who makes you listen? Pull the blanket over your head and sleep.' 
Aunt Luda was splashing in the kitchen, then the called Uncle Tolik to rub her back.


When he returned and sat on the folding-bed with his children, I noticed that there remained a narrow gap between the curtains through which you could see the mirror over the refrigerator reflecting the floorboards, the edge of the tin basin and the back of Aunt Luda sitting in it. 
And then I did what I was told to do and pulled the blanket over my head.
But I did not intend to sleep.
I placed the blanket on the wooden armrest of the couch and wrinkled it up into a ripple to watch into the distant mirror on the opposite wall of the kitchen.
There, practically, was nothing to watch – wet floorboards with splotches of soap foam, a slightly moving shoulder under the long wet black hair.
Then there remained only the floor and the edge of the tin basin because Aunt Luda got out of it.

But then she appeared again in the mirror and much closer too because she came up to it from below with a towel around her waist and naked breasts.
She smiled a little smile, licked her lips and looked straight into my eyes through my blanket periscope. 
I firmly shut my eyes and didn’t open them anymore while she was wiping the floor in the kitchen and coming over to the room.
Then everybody got to their beds, the light and TV turned off.
Only then I, at last, removed the blanket from over my head. 
The room was pitch dark. 

A little later various snuffling from all the sides mixed with the darkness and then from below, where the Arkhipenkos mattress had been put, came a low slowly rhythmic scraping as if a bale of straw was being clutched and released on the floor. 
I did not turn my head.
First, what the use in such a darkness?
And then, with the tons of books read before I knew without looking, they were cautiously making love.

Six months later, on a dark winter evening when I and Scully went to take a shower in the Plant he called me to watch through the windows of the female section in the Plant Bath lit from inside.
I did not approach.
Was I shy to do it in his presence?
I don’t know.
But even when I went to a shower alone I did not watch through those windows... 

And that same summer Raissa asked us to recollect the old good days and tour the city kindergartens with a puppet show.
In less than a week we gave ten performances.
In the morning we came to a kindergarten indicated by her the day before, installed in their dining room the screen brought by a Plant truck, hung a backdrop, set up tripods with the hut and a forest tree, performed the show before the much-respected tot public and moved to the next kindergarten; the scenery on the truck and the actors by tram. 

Kuba grumbled that we were got to a conveyor belt for a ‘thank you’ and who knows how much Raissa ripped off the kindergartens’ directors in eye-to-eye talks in their offices, but I did not care.
Raissa every day treated us with ice cream of the most expensive Plombir flavor and besides she once took everybody to a movie show in the Vorontsov Movie Theater and it was not her fault that ‘The Western Corridor' turned out to be such an eerie splatter film. 
Besides, and most importantly, the money we earned that week wouldn’t amount to the price of watching films in the Club with the check-passes from Director that we were doing for years after her lead...

The Club alone was not enough to satisfy my inclinations.
The temple of Melpomene in the Children Sector providing check-passes for the film going was a nice pastime but I had been always attracted by architecture. 
The only available grounds to practice it was the yard of our hutta.

Our parents allowed erecting an experimental structure there propped by the fence of the Turkovs from Number 17 under the condition that it would in no way block the easy access to the sections of the long shed in the yard, thus leaving no space for the complaints from the hutta dwellers. 

To get the construction materials I, with my brother and Scully, went to the Grove where wandering among the quagmire bogs of the Swamp, we cut two bundles of two-meter-long whips and brought them on a bicycle, plus a thick bunch of thinner branches with green foliage. 

Some of the whips became the lattice roof fastened with pieces of wire and all sorts of strings.
The roof lay on the fence with one edge and its opposite side was supported by the latticed wall from the rest of the whips.
Thus we got a nice cage in the crisscross style.
Then we covered the roof and two walls with the leafy branches. 
Wow!

Inside, the structure had a pleasant odor of fading leaves, and outside it pleased the eye by its presence in the corner of the yard.
A week later the foliage wilted but the delight and ecstasy with the creative efforts sagged even earlier. 
The question arose, the eternal question nagging any creator: what next?
You would not organize a clandestine pioneer group like that in ‘The Timur’s Team’ just because there was a suitable structure for its headquarters in your yard, would you?
Especially when you were past the age for such games.

So Scully and I switched over to our usual pastime – unsuccessful hurling of a kitchen knife into the old Maple tree trunk next to the ancient stack of crumbling bricks because that year the first Soviet Western ‘The Uncatchable Avengers’ at long last reached the Konotop cinemas and on the silver screen the Gypsy's knife hurled with a swish and stuck in the thin trunk of a white birch. 
In reality, though, even when striking with its blade point, the home-made knife would just bounce from the stone hard bark of the target...

The leaves of the structure withered, blackened and fell off but the cage-like skeleton withstood another couple of years. 

My itch for architecture still did not subside but the next creation I built alone.
The huts over the Duzenko’s and our earth-pit cellars stood each on its own with a gap of half a meter in between.
The gap was boarded up from the yard but coming from behind the huts, along with the neighbor's fence, you reached a narrow nook which it was possible to squeeze into. 

There I built my private study room.
A piece of plywood fixed in horizontal position to the boarding from the yard served a desk.
A length of plank nailed between the walls of the blind passage became a stool.
The design was more than Spartan but then no one would claim access to the study, neither my brother and sister nor the little Arkhipenkos. 
Well, let’s say they’d sneak in when I was not home, and then – what?

When the construction of the office was over, there again arose the doggone question: and what next? 
It’s good I had a place for unobserved secluded speculations where no one could see me except, perhaps, for Zhulka on the other side of clumsy boarding who clearly was not happy with my popping up in the unvexed quarters of the yard.
With an unhidden displeasure, he dragged behind him his iron chain over to his kennel.

And still, what for could be used that nook of solitude?
That's when I gave way to my penchant for graphomania.

I have no idea how to determine it in scientific cant—expressed or manifest—but I always felt a craving for new notebooks, albums, block-notes and the like items from the paper industry.
It's a thrill to spread them wide open and start to cover with the jerking lines of my clumsy handwriting their untouched purity… 
The only drag is finding content for those same lines...

It’s not an obstacle though for a beginner graphomaniac.
I just took a book about adventures of a group of circus actors in the turbulent years of the Civil War, then I found a thick notebook, not finished during the school academic year, and retired with them to my study, so to say, room...

(...a strange scientific fact: when it came to doing my written homework assignments, my graphomania got lost untraceably...) 

I opened the book and the notebook and started to copy the content of the first onto the ruled pages of the latter. 
I did not bother to ask myself about the purpose of that occupation.
What the hell!
I liked the process itself.

The process reached the middle of the second chapter when a spell of bad weather made my study too damp and chilly and the adventure story remained un-handmade-copied. 

In good weather, I had a private reading room, not of my own creation. 
The gardens unfolding behind the sectioned shed and earth-pit cellar huts were divided into plots by a net of narrow paths leaving the beds in between for garden and kitchen crops.
The beds did not merge into integral stretches of each owner because various historical processes led to the land swap and using it as means of paying for services or goods between the neighbors. 
As a result, the land possessions turned into a complicated patchwork strip. 
For instance, our tomato bed was located right behind the shed and followed by Duzenko’s kitchen garden separating our cucumber-sunflower plot and the booth of our outhouse next to the drain pit.
And potatoes we planted at the very end of the garden, past Pilluta’s stretch, under an old sprawling apple tree.
After our potatoes bed, there began, or rather ended, the plot belonging to the hutta in the Kotsubinsky Street, which ran parallel to the Nezhin Street.

So the vegetable and fruit gardens embraced by the huttas of three adjacent streets and one lane composed a vast area covered with beds and fruit trees of different sorts. 

The apple tree on whose mighty, wide sprawling branches I lounged in hot summer days, with a book, under the blue dome of the sky with massive mops of immovably hanging white clouds, was called Antonovka apple. 
The length of some of its branches allowed for laying upon them swaying slightly until a barely felt breeze would run up from the hot expanses.
When my sides started to ache from so too hard a hammock I'd climb down and go on a stealthy visit to the raspberry plot somewhere between Number 15 and 13. 
In the gardens, you occasionally came across a short stretch of a fence that served a dividing landmark between the possessions but not a barrier to a silent raid. 

That was where I read ‘The Star Diaries of Jon Calm' and ‘The Return From an Interstellar Mission' by Stanislaw Lem, ‘Khoja Nasreddin' by Vladimir Solovyov, ‘The Odyssey of Captain Blood' by Rafael Sabatini, among other works for the unsystematic reading by the younger generations. 
But then, for no obvious reason, I suddenly decided to meet the requirements of the school curriculum and started to learn by heart the poem ‘Eugene Onegin' by Pushkin though at school they, in fact, wouldn't ask to recite more than one stanza from it. 
The respect to the school curriculum served just an empty excuse: after solidifying the first stanza I went on to the next one and so, day after day, I murmured to the Antonovka apple tree about the always alert Breguet watch, and scrupulous London, and the lack of a pair of slender female legs in the whole Russia…

After more than twenty stanzas I began to lose myself in reciting of the initial ones, but then Mother helped me out.
Returning from the Sunday visit to the Bazaar she said of meeting there Lyudmila Konstantinovna, a teacher of the Russian Language and Literature from our school, who asked if I would like to go to Leningrad with an excursion of schoolchildren at an inexpensive price. 
You bet I would!
But where could I get the money from? 
Mother paid the price and gave me an incredible sum of ten rubles for the journey. 
Departing, I made a firm decision to buy a small billiards with that money, like the one we were playing at Children Section.

(..but now, not as a consistent narrator, but as a layman archaeologist wrapped in my sleeping bag in this tent to the accompaniment of the eerie symphony of the nightlife in this dark forest – would I be able to unearth the root reason for the self-straining memorization of the Pushkin's poem? 
It seems, that only now and just from here I would.

To begin with, the scheme ‘I decided and started to...’ does not apply to me.
The scheme itself is quite Okay.
It's a good, useful and flawlessly logical one, but my way of doing things is right the opposite. 
I act first and then start looking for a decision that would justify and make my action reasonable.
That is, I’m motivated not with some deliberate decisions but by some other reasons.
Then what or who, the hell, is prodding me to act?!
What are the secret springs and goads?
The answer is: my trustful and all too ready submission to the impact of the printed word. 
The stuff I read programs my subsequent actions.

When Alexander Belov, a Soviet secret agent, forced the fascist intelligence officer Dietrich to flip, before his eyes, through a folder with top-confidential documentation, and later, in a safe house, dictated to his helper-asset dozens of addresses, names, and figures from his memory, that made me start to memorize the rhymed lines by Alexander Pushkin. 
Pretending that it was a check if I could do it too is just a meaningless excuse, the root reason lays in just the fact of my reading ‘The Novel-Gazette’ with the work by Kozhevnikov which, frankly, does not deserve the name of a novel.

Or take another case, when, impressed by the book ‘The Baron in the Tree', about an aristocrat who refused to walk upon the ground anymore and moved to live in the trees, I mounted the stack of bricks under the unembraceable American Maple tree and from there climbed the less impregnable part of the trunk. 
I was climbing higher and higher, to the very clouds.
That day they floated quite low, almost brushing the top of the tree.
Viewed from the upper branches, distant huttas under the tree decreased to the size of matchboxes.
I looked down at the Bazaar, and at the Plant, no more hidden behind the high wall along the Professions Street, and at the Station on the other side of the Plant! 
The magic power of printed word by Italo Calvino made me obedient like melted wax, turned into a docile slave and landed on top of the American Maple tree...

Of course, the secret springs slip at times – how could I possibly compete with D’Artagnan and ride twenty leagues in one day running down three horses which I did not have?
Keep your legs to the length of the blanket, they say.
That’ why I like this sleeping bag so much – it fits any leg size...)

Our way to Leningrad ran through Moscow.
To the excursion, besides me and Lyudmila Konstantinovna, went two more girls from my class — Tanya and Larissa, and from the parallel, 7‘A’ class, Vera Litvinova, and Tolik Sudak; the rest of the participants were students from other city schools with two teachers of theirs.

The train arrived in Moscow in the morning and we spent there the whole day which brought me to three discoveries.

First was the discovery of the foreshadowing dreams existence. 
It was during our tour in an excursion bus around the city—look to the left! look to the right!—and in some place, we were asked to leave the bus and look at something from a near. 
Our group paced listening to the guide but I fell behind.
And then all of a sudden I seemed to be so familiar with that bridge above no river, and the distant high building of the Moscow State University and even that locked stall on the pavement. 
Someone from our group turned back and cried to me:
‘Don’t lag behind or we’ll leave without you!’
And I answered:
‘When you turn back, I’ll be the first!’
And at that moment I suddenly remembered that I had already seen that view in the smallest detail and spoke those words already in a dream that I dreamed a week ago. 
I was so amazed, that even stopped, but not for long – the excursion group was indeed returning to the bus.

(…in later life I occasionally had such influxes of falling into once-seen dreams.
Sometimes the recollection went preceding for a fraction of second the actual development of the events.
I knew who and what would say a second later and what gesture would they make because all the happening was just an echo of the scene I had already seen in a dream. 
Duration of such moments is not too long and the dream sometimes is separated from its echo by many years.
I did not share my discovery with anyone and much later, with a mixture of relief and disappointment, I learned that such things happen not only to me and that the Scots even have a special term for the phenomenon – ‘second sight’…)

For the second revelation, we went to the All-Union Exhibition of Achievements of the National Economy, aka Veh-Deh-eN-Kha. 
There we were taken to the Astronautics Pavilion, in front of which stood the white arrow of a ‘Vostok’ type spaceship, on which Gagarin orbited the Earth.
Several excursions at once wandered in the spacious pavilion between the stands and mock-ups, and mannequins in red space suits and white helmets. 
I did not know what the other guides were telling, but ours repeated things that anyone already knew so I kept lagging behind or running ahead and at some point turned in a wide side door.

Stone steps led upward and above them hung the inscription ‘Optics Pavilion’.
I ascended to the landing from which the steps turned to the pavilion itself.
But I didn’t go further.
I was fascinated by the extravaganza of color and airiness unfolding on the landing.

A cubic meter of space was filled with a motionless, as if frozen, family of soap bubbles radiating all hues of the rainbow colors. 
Delight, delight!

Someone from the Konotop excursion had noticed how I turned into that door.
I was called from below:
‘Come on we are leaving!’
I looked up at the glass door which I was not destined to enter and returned to ours. 

(...what was behind that door I do not know and the discovery is as follows: sometimes a single step away from the trodden rut opens new shining worlds, but a step aside is an escape attempt…) 

The final, third, discovery was lurking in the State Universal Shop, aka GUM, on the Red Square, where we arrived without any guide.
There I learned that dreams do come true, you just need to be ready for their fulfillment.

At the entrance to GUM, we were told to gather in the same place in half an hour and were dismissed into a free search. 
From the inside, GUM looked like a giant ocean liner: empty space in the middle, with multi-story transitions along its sides. 
In one of the compartments on the third floor, they were selling the billiards of my dream. 
And the price was exactly ten rubles.

How I was cursing my gluttony!
With the money given by Mother, I had already paid for two ice cream: one in the morning at the station and another at the Veh-Deh-eN-KHa. 
I had to say goodbye to my dream. 
To mitigate the grief, I ate one more ice cream right in the GUM.

In the evening tired but happy (if not to recollect the misfire with billiards) we left Moscow for Leningrad...

In the city on the Neva river, we were put on a camp at some school on the Vasilevsky Island, not far from the Zoo. 
We were allotted half of the school gym since the other half was occupied already by an excursion group from Poltava city. 

We did not constrain them—the gym was very spacious—only moved a number of black sports mats they were not using into another corner.
In addition to the mats, we were given cloth blankets and could sleep with more comfort than the royal court of France when they flew from the rioting Paris in ‘Twenty Years Later' by Alexandre Dumas. 

For three meals a day we went up a couple of blocks to a canteen over a humpbacked bridge above the Moika river. 
A very quiet place, with hardly any traffic.
There our elders paid with paper coupons, the girls arranged the food on the square tables and invited the others to come in from the street.

Sometimes we had to wait because apart from the Poltava’s and ours there also were other excursion groups – not from our gym though.
Then we stood on the bridge over the narrow river with its unobservable flow between the stone-walled banks. 

‘On the Moika bank
we ate garbage skank’

So ran the epigram composed by someone from our group.

(...the rhyme, of course, is flawless, but I personally had no complaints about the food there – everything was as it always was in any canteen I dropped in along my life path…) 

We were a little late for the white nights but everything else was in place – both the Nevsky Avenue, and the Palace Bridge, and trotting through the halls of the Hermitage with immense Pompei demolition by Karl Bryullov, and oily luxurious paintings by Dutch masters...

In the St. Isaac Cathedral they launched for us the Foucault’s Pendulum hanging from the main dome.
It swung for some time swishing between the high icon decorated walls and then pegged down one of the high wooden pins lined on the polished floor.
‘See?!' exclaimed the Cathedral guide.'The Earth is turning after all. The Foucault's Pendulum has just proved this scientifically.' 

The revolutionary cruiser Aurora did not accept us for some reason, but we listened to the Admiralty’s Cannon fired each day to mark the noon, and visited The Piskaryovskoye Cemetery with green lawns over mass graves and the pool by the dark wall for the visitors to throw coins in.

The day when we went to Peterhof was cloudy and crossing the Finnish Gulf we could not see the sea but only fog and a circle of yellowish water with low waves around the boat, like on a lake with a sandy bottom.
It was boring and dank, and when I got out of the passenger hall and climbed down the short ladder to the low stern churned up yellow water behind it, the boat boy came and told that passengers were not allowed there. 
I climbed back and he hung a chain on the ladder and started to wash the deck of the stern with a mop.
But the Peterhof fountains jetted pillars of surprisingly white water.

Everything in Leningrad turned out to be as beautiful as one would expect.
The weather got nice again, and on the first floor in the Naval Museum stood the boat of Peter the Great, almost the size of a brigantine, and the paintings depicting sea battles of the Russian fleet, starting with the battle in the Sinop Bay, hung on the second.

On the first floor of the Zoological Museum, a skeleton of whale bones towered high, and the central attraction on the second floor was the composition of life in Antarctica behind the glazed partition. 
The white snowfield was painted in the back and near the glass there stood a few adult penguins with their beaks up in the air. 
They were surrounded with a kindergarten of penguin chicks of different ages to show how they change when growing.
At first, I liked them very much – such fluffy cute creatures, but then the thought that all of them were stuffed animals abated my delight. 
Three dozen living birds killed for the exposition.
I did not want to look further and went down to the gnawed whale skeleton and out of the Museum.

In a glazed stall by the Zoological Museum, I bought a ballpoint pen—they did not sell such in Konotop yet—and two spare ampoules to it, folks said one of them would do for a month of scribbling... 

That day I was the first to finish the midday meal at the canteen and went out to the bridge over the Moika to wait for the rest of our group. 
Between the high walls of the river banks, a small white cutter cautiously made its way, dividing the black water into two long bumpy waves. 
Then an elderly man came up to me over the bridge and warned that my pants were stained on behind.
I knew about it. 
Two days earlier I had sat down on a bench somewhere and it left a whitish stain in the seat of my pants as if of pine resin.
It was unpleasant but I could not get rid of it with any rubbing or scratching. 
He asked where I was from.
‘We’ve come on an excursion. From Ukraine.’
The friendliness on his face sagged.
‘Ukraine,' he said. 'In the war years, they burned my side with the blowtorch there.' 
I remembered the buzz of a blue flame bursting from the nozzle of the blowtorch, and the black skin of Masha’s carcass.
He grew silent and so did I.
I somewhat felt guilty for being from the places where he was tortured.
It's good that our group, at last, came out of the canteen. 

The Poltava’s excursion group left two days earlier than ours.
On the last evening in Leningrad, we went to the circus tent. 
The places were at the top, under the canvas roof.
It was a united performance of circus artists from fraternal countries.

A pair of Mongolian acrobats synchronously jumped onto the end of a see-saw to toss up the third one standing on the other end.
The tossed man did a somersault in the air and landed on the shoulders of the artist standing in the arena. 
The pushers launched another one and one more – three people were placed upon the man below, like after the Battle of the Kalka River.
The gymnasts from DDR worked on four high bars put in a square so that they could fly from one bar to another.
Then the Czech trainers brought a group of monkeys out and those spun and circled on the bars left after the Germans, only much funnier. 
