
The next day we left without going to the canteen, probably, because of having run out of the coupons.
There was a very convenient train, without any train changes on the route through Orsha and Konotop.
Only the departure was in the evening and after all the ice cream eaten during the excursion, paying for the ticket to the circus tent, and the purchase of a ball pen, there remained just twenty kopecks of all the ten rubles given by Mother.
I had of a pair of pirozhki for the midday meal, but at about five o'clock, when we were already sitting in the waiting room at the station, Lyudmila Konstantinovna noticed my despondency and asked what the matter was. 
I confessed that I was hungry and had no money.
She lent me one ruble.

In a deli near the station, I bought bread and a big fish in oily brown skin tied around with thin strings. 
With the prey wrapped in a paper, I returned to the station with our train already at the platform. 
In the car, I immediately sat down at the table under the window and began to eat. 
Very tasty fish it was, easily crumbling but slightly dry in the end.
I ate half and the rest wrapped back and put it on the third level bunk designated not for sleeping but putting the luggage on.

Some single fellow traveler, a couple of years older than me, got seated at the opposite side of the table, took out a deck of cards and offered to play ‘fool’ with him.
I won a couple of times and, when he once again was shuffling the cards, flashed one of the Kandeebynno’s jokes:
'The poorer the head's job, the more work for hands.’
He squinted at the girls from our excursion sitting under the window over the aisle and retorted:
‘The less you yak the safer you are.’
I saw a genuine rage in his eyes and after winning another game refused to play on.
He seemed glad to stop it too...

We arrived in Konotop in the morning after an unusually heavy rain.
During the night in the car, something had happened to my shoes – they became too small size. 
I forced them on but not completely, and my heels were hanging outside. 
Hobbling painfully, I got off the car onto the platform and waited for our excursion to disappear into the underground passage leading to the Station. 
Then, I took my shoes off and in the socks only went along the wet Platform 4 to the familiar breach in the fence at the very end of it. 

Across the road from the breach stood the Railway Transportation College, I passed by and entered the Bazaar.
No one was surprised with my walking in socks carrying a disfigured shoe in each hand because there were neither passers-by nor traffic around but huge puddles everywhere.
After the Bazaar the ground disappeared altogether under the water surface.
I splashed along the tram track stepping on the railhead that stuck above the water and reaching the Nezhin Street just waded ahead indiscriminately – the hutta was not too far already.

Later, Mother laughed sharing with the neighbors that from the main cities I brought only a pair of shoes one centimeter too short for my feet.
I hadn’t heard or read anywhere that it’s possible to grow your feet one centimeter in just one night...

On the first of September, Mother gave me one ruble to repay the debt.
However, at the lining-up in the schoolyard, Lyudmila Konstantinovna was nowhere to be seen and in the teachers’ room, they told me she was sick.
They explained that she lived in the two-story apartment block by the Bazaar. 

I took the money to her place.
She started to say that there was no need for such a haste.
She even seemed to be not very happy that I had returned that debt at all.
Then her father came in and I was surprised – that was Konstantin Borisovich, the projectionist of the Club!
The world was a small place indeed.

(…if I were to be asked now about the most vivid impression of those got in the cultural capital of Russia,
I'd answer without a moment’s hesitation: the evening in the street with a stone parapet from which stone steps go down to the vast width of the Neva River by the Palace Bridge; the wave hitting the lower step with a splash and high spatter, and the sharp shrieks of the girls of our excursion standing on the second step above the water…)

And yet Lenin was right that there's no force as mighty as the force of habit.
Take, for example, the albums of beau monde young ladies, where Eugene, with a careless stroke of his pen, sketched out his author’s whiskered profile on the page following an autograph of a certain Lieutenant Rzhevsky.
Any decent young lady had such an album for the outpouring her personal feelings and creative scribbling of her acquaintances and guests. 

Of course, I have never kept such albums in my hands, but after a whole lot of wars, three revolutions and radical changes in the way of life, the albums for the sentimental exercises of a girl's soul still existed. 
The struggle for life taught them disguise.
No silk bows on the cover, no creamy pages. 
A general-purpose ruled-paper notebook in brown leatherette covers for thirty-eight kopecks – that's what the albums of girls in our class looked like. 
In place of long-nosed self-portraits of aristocratic rascallions there came pictures cut out from the color photos in ‘Ogonyok' magazine and mounted on glue. 
The poems, though, managed to survive:

  Why? O, I don’t know why
  A tram needs rails to go far or nigh
  Why? O, I don’t know why
  Why do parrots scream and cry?
  I do not know why…

Well, and of course, all sorts of wise thoughts and winged expressions: 

“The one who loves will forgive anything”
“Cheating kills love”

When such an album, accidentally forgotten on a desk, fell in a guy's hands, he, having turned over a couple of pages, would slap it back on the desk – some ‘girlish nonsense'. 
Yet to me, for some reason, those albums were interesting and I dutifully studied.
As a result, I got an offensive nickname of ‘she-butterfly' among the schoolmates. 

Nobody called me that to my face, even though when our class lined-up at the PE lesson I was only the fourth in the line and the shortest guy, Vitya Malenko, could beat me up in wrestling under the giggling of the girls. 
Yes, I have never heard that nickname, but if your sister and brother attend the same school there is no secret for you about you that you don’t know.

The school principal Pyotr Ivanovich Bykovsky, unlike the cosmonaut Bykovsky, had a Herculean physique.
When all the classes were lined-up in the long—from the teachers’ room up to gymnasium—corridor, the floorboards paint-coated in red creaked pitifully under his measured steps along the line of students.
The mighty dome of his head, with the trailing locks across it, towered half a head over the ranks of the tallest – graduating class.
The look of his big eyes from under the heavy eyelids sleepily passing your face made your inside contract involuntary even knowing that the paper sent from the Children Room of Militia had nothing to do with you and he would call another guy to get out of the ranks and face the lined-up schoolmates. 
So, no surprise that when our class Mistress, Albina Grigoryevna, told me to stay after classes and go to the Principal Office, my heart sank.

At that state—with my heart sunk and my spleen squezzed—I timidly knocked on the high door of his office followed by uncomprehending but farewell glances from Kuba and Scully.

In the long and narrow office with one window facing the door, Pyotr Ivanovich was sitting at the desk, which hardly reached him to the waist, in profile to the entering.
He told me to sit down on one of the chairs lined up along the wall opposite his desk.
I got seated expectantly and he slowly opened a thin copybook to keep a long silence over it, jerking angrily his thick clear-cut lips.
‘It is your essay on Russian literature,’ he announced at last.
‘You are writing here that the sky in the summer is not as blue, as in the fall.’
He looked into the copybook and read:
“… in summer it looks as if sprinkled with the dust at the edges...”
‘Where have you seen such a sky?’
 I recognized the incomplete quotation – from the opening sentence of my essay on the free theme: “I’m sitting by the window and thinking...” which was our home-assignment the week before.
‘In the Nezhin Street,’ answered I.

He began to drive it home to me, that it absolutely didn’t matter – be it the Nezhin Street, or the Professions Street, or the Depot Street, but the sky always remained the same both in its center and along its the edges.
And the blue was always blue.
And in the summer it’s blue, and so in the fall, because blue was blue.

On my timid attempt at maintaining my own standpoint on the sky blueness, he once again repeated his weighty arguments and I surrendered.
‘Yes, the same.’ said I.
‘That’s good. So, this your sentence is wrong.’

And we continued the same way.
He shattered every sentence in my essay into pieces, one by one, and I, after a short resistance, agreed.

From the lower corner of the window, thin iron bars beamed up in a divergent pattern, the walls squeezed the high ceiling of the corridor-like office, the heavy desk towered over the lined-up chairs, the convex sphere of the Principal's skull hovered over the desk with its cobweb of hair wisps unable to hide the bald, like a globe standing still in the locked storeroom of the School House Manager… 

And I renounce, line by line, from the beginning to the very end.
I renounce all and every sentence in my essay.

Yes, Pyotr Ivanovich, you’re right, I was completely wrong…
It’s wrong that I did not want to write following the template suggested by the teacher:
“Walking down the street I heard schoolchildren arguing about Tatyana Larina from the Pushkin’s immortal poem and on coming home I got seated by the window and started to think again about her, analyzing her social background and her love to the Russian nature...”

Yes, it's completely wrong that schoolchildren would rather discuss motorcycles, karate, and fishing but not Tatyana Larina's characteristic features. 
That’s an absolutely thoughtless and erroneous sentence.
When I agreed with him on all the points, he gave the copybook to me and said that I could go but I should think of it again.

I went out to the empty school.
From the entrance door came sounds of tin buckets rumbling against the iron sinks and the swish of water filling the buckets from the taps – the janitors had already started washing the floors. 
I numbly went by those five taps without looking at my reflection passing through five mirrors above the sinks.

From the high brick porch, I descended with an dizzy feeling that I was not myself and not sure of now what and how and whereto. 
Perhaps, Galileo felt the same after betraying his discovery.

At the gate, I stopped and opened my copybook. 
Below the essay there was put a fractional mark:
 the denominator (content evaluation) was blank, and the divisor (grammar evaluation) – four.
And after the mark, in the same red ink, Zoya Ilyinichna wrote, in that diligently pretty handwriting of hers, four pages of her own essay that I was wrong and belied the Soviet youth.
I should remember the winged words from the novel ‘How the Steel was Tempered’, and remember the heroes of Krasnodon underground, and the heroes of the Red Army…

(...from that time on, I wrote following the templates; the ‘berserk’ publicist Belinsky didn’t become out of me nipped in the bud…)

The Physics classroom of School 13 was well equipped.
Curtains of dense blue cloth hung from the iron rings running along the string-cables above the windows. 
They were pulled together before demonstrating educational films in different school subjects.
But there was no screen – the films were projected onto a large square of frosted glass frame in the wall above the blackboard.
Just like a 2 x 2 meters TV for you.

The film projector was put in the back room behind that frame in the wall. 
In addition to the projector and tin cans of films, it had lots of shelves with different lenses, tripods, rheostats, weighs and other untold treasures in boxes, caskets, cases – for staging various experiments from the textbooks on physics and chemistry. 
And also the gray trunk-like tape recorder ‘Saturn’ loaded with the tape on two white reels.

The film projectionist and keeper of all those hoards was the teacher of Physics, Emil Grigoryevich Binkin, a calm handsome man of about thirty with his eyebrows slightly twitched up his straight forehead to meet the short wisps of the curly black hair well matching the swarthy skin of his face.
During the breaks, he stacked and reshuffled the things collected in the treasury while quietly whistling all kinds of melodies, so clearly and subtly without the slightest clam. 

I had a wary attitude towards him.
First, for the abolishing of my reading at his Physics lessons.

Normally, I brought to school some library book and at the lessons, I opened the folding part of the desktop, put the book on the shelf for the briefcase and – full ahead, Captain Blood! Let's board them! 
Teachers were also happy – so quiet a boy, no trouble at all. 
Though occasionally some of them made attempts at breaking the serene co-existence – I obviously was busy with anything but their lesson.
‘Ogoltsoff! What have I just said?’
But even immersed in a different, Antarctic-Tropical-Martian world I did not completely disconnect from the surrounding school reality.
Some float on the edge of consciousness received, as a muffled background, the current sounds in the classroom.
‘Ogoltsoff!’
Aha, it’s time to come up the surface.
The memory rewinds the background recording for half a minute back.
‘You, Alla Iosifovna, have just said that ‘read’ is an irregular verb.'
‘Get seated!!’
And then at the Class Parents Meeting, she would complain to Mother: 
‘I clearly see that he’s busy with something miles away from the lesson it's only that I can't run him down.’

Binkin had no problems with running me down.
He did not demand to repeat, he asked questions:
‘So, what conclusion can be made? Ogoltsoff?’
And that’s where no mechanical rewind of the previous background could come to the rescue.
How to draw conclusions from you didn’t know what?
Especially under the sights of an ironic look of dark eyes over the thin rim of glasses. 

He was killing with his cool calmness and seemed to know what page the book for bootleg reading was open at.
I had sometimes to get prepared for the Physics lessons and reading was postponed till Chemistry and Algebra.
No, I couldn't disdain Binkin.

Only once it came to an arm wrestling. 
On the point of temperature difference of physical bodies.
He asked whether the temperature of the boiled potato and the soup around it was the same.
I answered – no, it’s different.
‘Alas, but physics says yes, the same.’
‘Yesterday, I ate soup for the midday meal and it was fine, but then I bit through a potato in it and burned my tongue. Why did not physics help me out?’
The laughter of the classmates mingled with bell ringing for a break.

That is why I was astounded when our Class Mistress, Albina Grigoryevna, announced that on Sunday, at eleven o'clock I should be at School 11 for the City Olympiad on Physics. 
It was a sunny Sunday morning when I went out of the Nezhin Street to the tram stop by our school. 
The prestigious School 11 was on the other side of the Over-Underpass, halfway between it and the Railway Station.
Our Settlement red tram with its round—like a clown’s nose—lamp under the driver cab came up to the stop.
Under the nose-lamp, there was the inventory number of the car – 33. 
I fully understood, that all that was a pure nonsense and superstition, however, did not want to let the opportunity pass by. 
If there were double digits, say, 22 or 77 and so forth in a car license plate, or in the number printed on a ticket to a movie, or on a ticket the conductor sold you in a tram, that meant you were in luck.
You should ball your fist and inaudibly pronounce the incantation:
‘The luck is mine. Full–period!’
Which I did.

At the Olympiad among the fourteen-year-old students from the fourteen city schools, I solved some problems about acceleration and specific weight, and density, but not all.
To the concluding question:
‘Why do we first see the lightning and only then hear the thunder?’
I even draw a pencil sketch explaining the interval between the flash and bang.

Next week Binkin with an unconcealed surprise announced that I took the first place among the eighth graders at the city Olympiad in Physics.
I did not know whether the number under the nose of the tram brought luck, or the solution checkers were impressed with the clumsy lightning but it’s nice to realize that you had beaten the representative of the prestigious School 11 and even the guy from School 12 with its mathematical specialization.
Get it from the Plant Settlement guys!

‘The Dead Season’ was being shown in the Club.
The three of us bought tickets to ensure the show.
At times, when no tickets were sold the projectionists refused was open to show the film for only the check-passers.
However, the audience turned out big enough.
Not so many as at the Indian ‘Zita and Guita’ but half of the auditorium had got filled.

The movie was about our secret agent in the United States starring Donatas Banionis from ‘No One Wanted to Die' where he was shot at the end and fell on the desk without finishing the note he was writing. 

And in America, they followed him for a long time then caught and jailed for twenty years, but then exchanged for a CIA agent caught in the Soviet Union. 
A black and white film, but of the widescreen format.
Banionis was wearing a luxurious white shirt.
You could at once see that was not nylon, but he cooked in that shirt it in the kitchen, only turned up the sleeves. 

A cool movie, in general.
When it was over, we slowly moved towards the exit – yea, some folks managed to live an interesting life.
And then Kuba slammed his muskrat-fur hat against his fist and said:
‘Okay! First thing in the morning – to meet Solovey and enroll a school of secret agents!' 
Skully and I laughed and laughed and laughed because Solovey was the Precinct Militiamen at the Settlement.

Actually, no one called him ‘the Precinct Militiaman’, they just said ‘Solovey’ and everyone got it at once.
When he entered the Bazar, a muffled ‘sol!..- sol!..- sol!..’ swished along the counters and crowding caboodle.
The old peasant women from Podlipnoye or Popovka buried deeper in their bags the glass bottles and hot water bottles with moonshine to make them out of sight. 
Then they returned to the legitimate part of their trade standing behind the counter with a glass of black seeds, or a braid of onions – law-abiding goods.
But no kidding with Solovey‘s scent!
And more than once, under loud curses from the trader, he poured onto the ground the bootlegged ‘samohrie’ from her sturdy bag.
Once some drunk could not stand the temptation, fell on his four bones and lapped the moonshine from the puddle.
Solovey pounced on him, and a couple of times drove his boot into the alky's side, but the guy was in the Land of Happiness already. 
Well, the vehicle arrived and he was taken to the Sobering-up Station.

Yet, Solovey got his share as well at times.
They would trap him someplace in the dark and warm him up with a blizzard of beating.
One time they poured kerosene over him and set on fire, in another sorting out his arms were broken with a crowbar. 
Well, the guys would get their prison terms, he’d recover and again – to the Bazaar in the red militiaman cap and there again:
‘sol!..- sol!..- sol!..’

So, Kuba made a good joke about enrolling a secret service school through Solovey...

During the winter holidays, the winners of the City Olympiad in Physics were taken to the city of Sumy, for the Regional Olympiad. 
In the Konotop group, there were four boys and a girl, a ninth-grader. 
Though, she, actually, looked quite an adult girl.
In Sumy, we were accommodated for a night stay in a hotel. 
The number of boys coincided with the quantity of beds in the room. 
Our mentor was a teacher from School 12 of Math and Physics specialization and he stayed somewhere further along the corridor and the girl-like-an-adult in some female number.
Soon everybody gathered in our room.
The head of the group came with a couple of Collections of Tasks and Exercises in Physics for Matriculants.
Jee!
I had never seen such books and until that moment the school textbooks were, in my opinion, all there was in physics. 
It was a misconception.
The rest of the future Einsteins from Konotop met the Collections as their good acquaintances and even bosom friends. 
They began to actively discuss in which sections there were complex tasks and in which not so much so.
The teacher offered to work out some of the tasks, just for a knock-up.
Everyone immediately started scribbling formulas and explaining them to each other.
I clearly was ‘the sixth odd’ in the company.
The problems were far beyond those that Binkin solved with us on the class blackboard.

Then we went out to the city to have a meal at a canteen. 
On the way back I lagged behind and furtively admired the gait of the girl-like-an-adult.
The green coat tightly fitted her wide figure and every step produced oblique folds in the coat's cloth on her back. 
Flick to the right, flick to the left.
Hither-thither.
Flick-flick.

In fact, all I saw was a long coat, boots and a knitted hat.
There’s nothing to look at but those rhythmic folds on her back.
Falling back to the Onegin’s epoch cant – they drove me crazy.

Though seemingly a trifle, they were not that for a connoisseur and collector of like things.
Some books were reread for more than once just because I knew there were a couple of lines about it.
A couple of miserly lines, but they contained a specific detail, which I would put in my secret casket for later use.

For instance, in a sci-fi story by Harry Harrison about the time machine, a film-shooting crew jumped in the year of one thousand to make an action movie.
Their male star got an accident and they had to replace him with a local Viking.
The film director was instructing the newly baked actor which actions were expected of him:
‘You rush into a bedroom in the castle you’ve just seized.
You see a half-awake beauty and throw away your weapon.
Sit down on the bed next to her and slowly move her bra strap to fall from her shoulder. 
That’s all. The scene is done.
The rest the watchers will imagine for themselves.
And, take my word, their imagination is something you can always put your trust in!’

Aha! That’s the long-awaited-for detail!
The bra strap smoothly sliding from the soft round shoulder…
That’s not a vague ‘kiss on the sugar-sweet lips’ for you.
And the same evening with the blanket pulled over my head and the eyes closed tightly, I burst into a half-asleep beauty’s bedroom.
But, of course, without any stupid cameras and highlights.
I am not a movie Viking but a real-life one and we are having the real Middle Ages around here. 

I throw away my shield and sword and flick her bra strap off.
At first, she resists but after looking at the handsome features of my face she willingly spreads on the bed.
I roll on top of her body…
A hot wave floods the lower part of the belly…
My dick twitches in a boner…
My eyes are shut…
And I…
What?!!!
I do not know what’s next.

So, it’s time to rest and then dive into the coveted casket for some other secret detail and already around that one build up a situation leading to a painfully sweet state.

(...Leo Tolstoy fervently advocated against masturbation.
Any real saint starts his career as an unscrupulous sinner, otherwise, there won't be the torments of self-denying which elevate a man above a merely animal level.

I cannot make a final conclusion whether my erection orgies may be classified as an ordinary masturbation.
On the one hand, there was no mechanical friction applied with the palms and I had no cum.
But on the other hand, what if that was only a prelude?
The initial part.
What if not for my brother sleeping next to me on the same couch I’d go astray and join the ranks of 95% of all males with Leo Tolstoy and the classics of Italian cinematography at the head?..)

Once in our schoolyard, Kuba asked: 
‘Did you know that wanking originate a hair growth on palms?’
Scully and I looked at our hands synchronously under Kuba’s guffaw.
I knew that my palms were sinless, but I looked at them.
Out of pure instinct.

So it turned out that the folds flicking this way that way in front were not a neglectable trifle.
Maybe in some future session of my contactless masturbation, the green coat would open and a tender voice call:
‘Are you cold too? Come closer. Let’s warm each other...’
And I…
What?!!.
