
In the evening the mentor again brought the book of problems and insistingly suggested to pay attention to such and such numbers. 
The winners gave them short shrift, and I only silently looked over their shoulders keeping the countenance of a weathered problem cracker.

The Regional Olympiad took place in some institute for higher education.
In the auditorium for eighth graders, every competitor was given a thin copybook with an ink stamp on each of its double sheets. 
On the first page, you had to write your name and where you were from. 
The following one or two were for rewriting the problems from the blackboard, six tasks all in all.
Jee! Three of them turned out to be the ones that the previous evening our mentor was solving with the wise guys in the hotel room.
But the morning had not made me any wiser, the problems seemed as unapproachable as they were last evening.

It was boring to sit idly yet to get up and leave at once looked impolite.
The tense silence of concentrated work of brains reigned around.
Opening the last page in the copybook I started a pencil sketch of a pirate.
I could vividly imagine his face – the broad mustache, the eyes big as plums, and a turban on his head. 
And he was glancing over his shoulder.
But on the paper, everything went wrong. 
Even the pistol with a widening muzzle, like those by the robbers in ‘The Snow Queen', did not make it better. 
Hmm, I did not live up to being Isaac Newton and turned out too lousy a painter for becoming Repin. 
I recollected Father’s ass that pulled him out of the Party Studies School.
It looked like I had to walk out on my own foot…
I took the copybook to the inspectors' desk and left... 

Of course, the fiasco in so important areas—Physics and Painting—became a moral stress for me.
To deaden the harsh feeling of defeat, or in a nutshell, from grief, I bought a pack of cigarettes with filter – ‘Orbit’ for thirty kopecks.
However, the orbital test was delayed until my return to Konotop where I waited two days more for a right moment to retire with the tempting pack to the outhouse in the garden. 

One drag. Another.
A fit of coughing.
Transparently greenish bagels floated before the eyes.
Nausea.
All the symptoms described by Mark Twain in Tom Sower’s case.
We should put more trust in classics, not to throw the almost intact pack of ‘Orbit’ into the dark hole in the outhouse floor...

Opposite the Station square, across the tram track and the asphalt road there was the park named after Lunacharsky, the first Soviet Minister of Education, with alleys of tall trees and curtains of trimmed bushes.
Not far from the park entrance, a white monument to Lenin stood on a tall gray pedestal facing the Railway Station.
With his left hand clutching the jacket lapel, he lowered his right one at full arm's length and a little withdrew it back in a politically poetic attitude. 
Behind the monument, peered through the lined-up trees the massive cube of the three-storied Culture Palace named after Lunacharsky, in Konotop parlance just the Loony. 
Not the Minister of Education, of course, but the Culture Palace.

It bore no architectural excesses – flat walls, square windows, rectangular entrance.
The Loony, actually, had four stories, the fourth, comprising the auditorium for film shows, was deep in the basement.
However, since the same films were shown at Club only one week later where we could see them free thanks to check-passes from the Club Director, the Loony was not within the scope of our interests. 
The excitement about the Loony Culture Palace broke out in the second half of the academic year when there started the season of the Club of Jolly and Inventive, aka CJI, games between the city schools.
Then everybody wanted to get into the auditorium on the second floor with the smooth parquet floor and close rows of blue-velvet-covered seats.

They did not sell the tickets to the CJI.
I had to beg a ticket from the School Pioneer Leader, and Volodya Gourevitch would answer that the ticket distribution was in the hands of the City Komsomol Committee and it's not his fault they allotted so few for our school and our teachers in the Teachers' Room had ripped them off from him already. 
The tickets had no seat numbers marked so it was wiser to come in advance to occupy a seat and not stand all the game in the aisles or perch on the narrow marble window sill at the end of the hall with your back to the dark cold night behind the window panes, for that was winter after all... 

In winter the Physical Education classes were held outside.
The teacher Lyubov Ivanovna unlocked the dark ‘cell’ next to the mutual door to the Pioneer Room and the School Libray.
Each student grabbed a pair of skis and poles leaned against the blind walls of the ‘cell' and went to the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street to run under the poplars along the train line. 
Lyubov Ivanovna looked into her big round stopwatch and announced the results.
Next to her stood a pair of girls who on that day for some reason could not run and kept the class register for Lyubov Ivanovna to put her marks for the sporting achievements. 

Some interesting equality of sexes, eh?
The girls could run or not run at their wish, but if you’re a boy nobody ever asked whether you wanted it or not – run! Run!
The fastener-straps on school skis were much too hard.
They didn't hold a candle to those made by Father from thick rubber bands in old days at the Object. 
But I did not bring my skis to school for PE lessons, they were for extracurricular usage...

That day after the midday meal we, three friends, went skiing on the hill behind the Grove in the vicinity of Podlipnoye.
The hill was quite steep but we glided no more than a couple of times when two grown-up guys came from the village and demanded our skis. 
One of them even wanted to hit Kuba, but Kuba ducked and glided down out of reach. 
Scully and I followed but not in the steepest place.
Those two followed running on foot and at the edge of the Grove, the faster runner stepped on the end of my ski. 
I fell.

When I got up I saw that Scully had already removed his skis, bunched them onto his shoulder and ran dodging between the dark trunks of the winter Grove. 
The picture was obscured by a head in a black rabbit-fur hat with loosened flaps.
The fur of the visor covered his eyes and only the smirk of his thick lower lip remained visible.
That portrait disappeared as well when I took it on the nose and collapsed by a tree.

‘Got it? Take off the ski!’
His buddy ran up in a moment.
He was either less drunk or more sensitive – the snow around was spattered with sizable drops of blood trickling from my nose.
So they just told me to get lost and left towards the village.

I slowly skied through the Grove plugging my nose with lumps of snow.
When one got red through, I rolled up another…

In the side street near the school, I was met by Kuba. 
He looked into my face and told I’d better wash it under the tap, and he also said that Volodya Gourevitch was waiting for us in the classroom of the tenth graders to discuss something.

In the schoolyard, I took off my skis and went up the porch of the empty school.
The blood was oozing no more.
By five o’clock the janitors had been already left.
Only the watchman remained in the school building and sometimes a group of pioneers preparing a collective recital under the button-accordion of the School Pioneer Leader.

In the mirror above the sink I saw that it was not my face – the nose two times thicker than mine and under it, there was a mustache painted with brown makeup. 
The chin was also stained with gore.
I washed and when Kuba said it wouldn't become any better, I wiped my face with a handkerchief. 
The pulse throbbed dully in the nose. 

In the classroom where Kuba led me to, there was only Volodya Gourevitch. 
Delicately keeping his glances off my face so as not to hurt my puffed up nose, he made a speech about a crying shame, that each year our school had been kicked out from CJI in the first pool of the game. 
The result of our over-reliance on the graduation classes.
We had to break that vicious practice.
We had to find new forces.
New blood was what we needed.
I looked back at Kuba.
He shrugged his shoulders and Volodya Gourevitch declared that I would be the Captain of the CJI team of School 13.
The throb of pulsation became more distinct yet not in the nose but in the nape as from that publication of a stranger's story signed with my name in ‘The Pioneer’ magazine.

A month later the CJI team from School Thirteen unexpectedly won their first game.
At the greeting contest, Kuba and I came on stage in real tails and bicorns from auntie Tanya's Costume Room at the Plant Club. 

Napoleon (acted by me) was in his swell attitude – the right hand on his chest, the left one, balled into the fist, pressed to the back above the buttocks. 
With heartfelt lyricism I thoughtfully recited the famous line:
‘Moscow! How much for Russian heart converged in your name’s sound!’
Then, shaking the poetic enchantment off, sounded the abrupt order to Marshal Murat: 
‘Burn Moscow down!’
Kuba sniffed his nose and replied:
‘Okay, sire! We’ll do it!’
The hall rolled in laughter and the rest of our team came on stage in casual clothes and bicorns made of Whatman paper to the sounds of the button-accordion from behind. 
We still joked a bit and won the greeting contest, and, eventually, the whole game. 

That way, joking and easy going, we reached the final game in May because everyone had learned already that we were a strong team and if not to laugh at our jokes then to whose else? 
At the contest of the Captains, it was enough for me to place my hands into the Napoleon attitude and move my chin to the right and up in Mussolini-like manner and the audience would readily guffaw. 

I just did not like that the script of our first victorious start-up was copied from the TV.
We just repeated the performance of a CJI team on the Central TV a few years before.
Volodya Gourevitch laughed out loud in response and repeated that the winners were not liable to censure.
All the same, it was like dubbing your name over another guy's stuff. 

So, the concluding seconds of the final game were running out and the Jury Chairman read on his mic:
‘...and the winner becomes the CJI team of School 13!’
Still not believing in what I heard, I, together with the whole hall shouted ‘A-a-a!’
I turned to our team and saw that they were rushing towards me – and Kuba, and Scully, and Sasha Uniat from the ninth grade, and Sasha Rodionenko from ours, and they also shouted ‘A-a-a!’ while running.
And then, instead of them, a white light and blue curtains flew at me.
I did not immediately realize that coming up to me and flying off were the neon daylight lamps in the ceiling of the stage.
They were tossing me in the air... 

The following year we won again but there was no Captain tossing already.
In the tenth grade, we reached the finals but lost to the prestigious School 11. 
At that final game, we parroted a CJI team at the Central Television from the current year.
The game on TV was still too fresh in the memory of many and we were accused of brazen plagiarism.

But all that was still in the future and so far I was still listening to a fiery speech about the change of school generations and the pulsation from my nose moved to the back of my head.
I was surprised to think about the sudden swerves in the tidal currents of fate: in just one day the rise from a trampled skier to Captain, damn it!
So, I had no grounds to take offense at my fate.
Only from that day, my flawlessly Roman nose remained a bit turned to the right. 

Fate, aka fortune, does not go as a crow fly but follows a sine curve like a tipsy drunkard and besides it undulates up and down: the crest – a trough; the peak – a pothole. 
Yesterday, for example, Volodya Gourevitch with a loud laugh handed me a postcard posted on School 13 in my name.
It was sent by the ninth-grader girl-like-adult who participated in the Regional Olympiad in Physics.
Congratulations on the victory in the CJI with a screwed-in quotation from Mayakovsky: 
‘Shine everywhere and always shine!..’

I did not reply prevented by the jolly laughter of Volodya or, maybe, ashamed by her unawareness that I had been unbuttoning her green coat under my blanket. 

And today I went to the Peace Square because my sister told that near the building where they sold kvass in summer from the yellow barrel-trailer, there was put a booth for refilling ballpoint pen ampoules for just ten kopecks.
In bookshops, they sold such ampoules, both short and long, charging twenty-two kopecks apiece. 

On the way back I stood near the driver’s cab with a large poster fixed on the glass wall from inside, the size of an open newspaper with the headline ‘Rules For Using Tram in the City of Konotop of Sumy Region’.
Did other cities have different rules?
Or had anyone, except me, read those columns of the Rules items?
The rules to how to correctly ride a tramcar. 
How much the ticket cost.
Whom to cede your seat to.
And in the end about the measures of administrative penalties and the three-ruble fine for being caught without a ticket.
A good quality paper in the poster, and seen at a glance that thicker than a newsprint.

The conductors with their strapped handbags had disappeared from trams long ago.
In place of the tickets came paper coupons sold by the driver from their cabin through a small window in the cabin door.
Only that window located not comfortably making you stoop so too low when buying the coupons.
Yet for a driver in their seat, exactly right height. 

Between the windows in tram walls, they had screwed up small boxes with lever-handles. 
Inserting your coupon in the slot of the box, you pulled the lever to punch the paper with a series of holes.
Looking at them closely you could make out certain digits.
Occasionally a pair of inspectors boarded the car at the tram stops.
They asked the passengers to present their coupons and checked if those had right digits.
In the Tram Depot, they changed the digits in the levered boxes. 
Ain’t it smart?

Yet, any smartness could be outsmarted.
Some guys kept in their pocket a handful of used coupons and traveled for free handing the inspectors the whole bunch when being checked: 
‘How could I know which one is from this tram? You look for the right one.' 
The inspector, though, might have started carping: some coupons after a month ride in the pocket got really fretted. 
However, they'd sooner give up and move to the next passenger. 

Under those rules, I stood, although there were vacant seats, simply in winter standing seemed warmer than sitting. 
One guy boarded at the stop by Zelenchuk area.
I knew him though not by his name.
He was from the graduating class at our school, and I although saw him in the Club a couple of times. 
So he came up to me. 
Hey. Hey. How's all? So-so. 
And we went on standing silently.

Then I saw the jerk started clamping me as if a girl.
There was the tram pane on the right and the driver cab behind me with those darn Rules behind the handrail.
The clown grabbed the handrail and pressed me into the corner.
I told him:
‘Piss off! Stop horsing!’
But he only giggled and squinted his eyes yet didn't let go.
I looked at the passengers. 
They all were similarly looking through the windows as if on an excursion to a famous city as if something could be seen through the ice-coated panes. 
To put it short, I barely managed to wriggle out of his grip and stood on the steps by the door.
I had to put my clothes in order because of both the jacket and the sweater, well everything up to the naked skin, got jerked up. 

So a stupid asshole.
If you’re bent that way go and enroll Greko-Roman wrestling group at the Club’s Gym and rub against your partners on the mats.
And what humiliation for the famous CJI Captain to get into such sinusoidal flop.

And the following crest rolled up in late April at the All-Union game ‘Zarnitsa', aka ‘Heat-Lightning'. 
Nominally, the game was for pioneers, but it involved all the senior classes.
I was appointed the Commander of the United Formation of School 13.
No paper shoulder straps, no division into ‘blues’ and ‘greens’.
But everybody should be equipped with a knapsack with the field ammunition: a bowl and spoon, a needle and thread.

After the lining-up in the schoolyard where a PE teacher, Ivan Ivanovich, checked the contents in a pair of knapsacks, we went along the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street, past the Bazaar and turned into the Budyonny Street.
There we passed the Plant Park and went down to the Swamp, aka Grove.
A thick fog covered all the movements of the column on the march.

We stopped at the Grove and the PE teachers, Ivan Ivanovich and Lyubov Ivanovna, opened a sealed envelope with our further route and mission. 
The column proceeded to the bridge in the high railway embankment.
Besides the main tracks, there was a local branching from under the bridge to the Meat-Packing Plant and following it we outflanked the Grove from the left.

The fog was thinning and through its rising wisps, there peeped a bumpy field. 
Ivan Ivanovich roared ‘To attack!’ and we ran across the field shouting ‘Hurray!’
I ran in the midst of the crowd and didn't feel my body.
It seemed to dissolve in the general attack and all I could feel were just wisps of the fog and the tussocky bumps jumping before and past me...

Then we stopped not far from Podlipnoye in the field with occasional thick-trunk elms.
The fog cleared completely and the day became glad and sunny.
A real army field-kitchen arrived from the village.
We were fed with hot soup.
Then we returned through the Grove to our school and lined up again.
As the commander, I stood to face the ranks, from the sixth to the tenth graders, and some cameraman shot us buzzing with his hand camera. 
The next week Volodya Sherudillo mockingly (but very funny) acted me standing in front of the ranks with slouched shoulders till the moment the camera was turned to me and I thrust out my chest so too bravely and stretched at attention almost to tiptoes.

(...I think sometimes: were it not for the daily water dragging from the pump to our hutta – might I have become taller than the fourth when our class lined up?..)

That spring I had a dream of a long journey and by no other means but a raft.
Most likely I was impressed by the Tour Heyerdahl's ‘Kon-Tiki'. 
I shared my dream with Kuba and Scully and they approved it, yeah, that would be great they said. 

We began to discuss the details of its realization.
If, say, the raft was built on the Seim river then with its flow, we would reach the river of Desna and further downstream to the mighty Dnieper river that flowed to the Black Sea.
And the journey should be completed before August because then Kuba would leave for examinations to a Navigators College and Scully to a Mountain Technical College in Donetsk. 

The dream lasted for two weeks and then it began to wither.
More and more insurmountable problems arose in the way of bringing it to life.
Okay. Suppose we’d make a deal with the watchman in the pine forest on the Seim river.
Then how to move a log from the forest to the river? To drag it half a kilometer?
But for a raft, you needed more than a log or two. 

And then I ran into a thought that finally smashed the dream into fragments.
I remembered that on the Dnieper, following the Lenin’s plan of GOERLO, they built a number of hydro-electric power stations with their dams across the river.
And that was an unsurpassable barrier. 
Could we take the raft apart to drag, log by log, to the other side of each dam?
Damn!

I did not tell my friend that the realization of Lenin’s dream of the electrification had crossed out our dream; I just stopped to discuss it with them.

Volodya Gourevitch, who also was an Ilyich, declared that we had to shatter the hegemony of School 11 at the city Ballroom Dancing Competitions. 

Of the two parallel eighth classes, five pairs of willing dancers gathered for the first training in ballroom dancing. 
Volodya Gourevitch demonstrated to us the movement of the ballroom waltz and then he played it on his button-accordion for us to dance. 
After that Scully refused to participate, he said he just did not want to.
Kuba and I lasted longer but very soon the group of prospective dancers disintegrated. 
What's the point to go on if, for example, my partner, Natasha Grigorenko, after finishing the eighth grade was moving to School 12 with its Math and Physics specialization which gave more chances to pass exams to some Institute after the school graduating? 

End May Kuba and I had a bike ride to the Seim River Bay beach to open the swimming season. 
It turned out that twelve kilometers of bike-riding along an even path under the railway embankment was not a too long distance.
On the beach, there was not a single soul except for us and our bikes getting their rest on the sand. 
And the water was still too cold but we took a swim all the same.

Then mosquito swarms flew from the bushes.
They buzzed and droned from all the sides and stung so too badly.
Probably, we had just fallen out of the habit during the winter.
We tried to bury ourselves in the sand, but the sand was also cold and didn’t protect from the cannibal mosquitoes.
We yelled like mad in the empty beach and then took another swim and rode back to Konotop.

We didn’t know yet that life, actually, is a series of losses, but felt that from that beach our ways diverge…

Yes. That year School 13 became the hegemon in everything except for the ballroom dancing. 
We won even the city schools competition in the concluding stage of the All-Union game ‘Zarnitsa’.

On a Sunday, the teams from city schools, six people each, under the supervision of their PE teachers went on a one day hike to the forest near the Seim River.
There were all sorts of competitions: for the best time in transporting an ‘injured', for putting up a two-man tent, for bandaging skills… 

My part in the competitions was measuring distances by eye. 
The umpire asked how many meters were to the tree over there and then silently recorded the estimations.
I followed the changes in his facial expressions.
Someone said the distance was twenty meter.
The umpire lifted his right eyebrow, perhaps, an overshoot.
On the assumption of fourteen meters, the umpire's mouth dropped its left corner – not enough. 
I called the average – seventeen meters.
With everyone through their guessing, the umpire checked his records and announced that my estimation was the most accurate – I didn’t need a tape-meter.

Yet everything had to be decided by the last contest – boiling water on fire in a ten-liter tin bucket.
No favoritism would help out, neither reading of facial expressions. 

The start given, the matches stroke matchboxes by the brushwood mounds readied for bonfires.
Dense white smoke gave way to crackling flames – it’s time to hang the bucket over the fire and add the firewood to it; the drier, the better.
The red tongues of fire fluttered unsteadily under the bucket licking its tin blackened with soot.
The bastard of a wind!
So much of flames kept by it away from under the bucket.
The team of School 12, trying to control the situation, held a blanket in their hands to block the wind from access to their fire. 
And we?

Our PE teacher Ivan Ivanovich, a wartime soldier, and an experienced fisherman scornfully waved aside their smartness. 
That’s all bullshit!
More brushwood, the drier, the smaller.
Put it on that side!

No textbook presented me with a clearer and more memorable idea of the stages in boiling water.
Heating; light steam over the water; formation of tiny bubbles on the vessel walls. 
The bubbles float up forming an agitated foam and, at last, the water in the bucket started to bump up, jump and splash and gush the white steam up. 

The umpire clicks his stopwatch.
Hooray! We are the first!
And School 12 were still standing around their bucket watching the bubbles on the tin walls.

The competitor teams boarded the buses.
Except for those who wanted to spend the night in two large tents. 
The bus to take them back to Konotop would arrive in the morning...

As twilight began to condense I went away from the glade with the tents into the depth of the forest.
In general, it was the same as at the Object only more deciduous than coniferous. 
Taking a leak I looked around.
Suddenly, a part of the forest moved and separated from the rest.
What’s happening?
The eye unaccustomed to that moving form started to make out something more or less understandable…
Wow! That’s a moose! What a whopper!
And it was standing so close to me…
Looking after the giant disappearing among the trees I thought that I did not in vain stay for the night. 

At night I regretted that I had stayed.
Due to inexperience and unbridled individualism, I lay down the last in the group of guys preparing for the night, next to the canvas wall of the tent.
The night chillness woke me up an hour later and forced to press my back against the penultimate guy in our sleeping group, in search of a drop of warmth. 

In the small hours, chilled to the extent of freezing, I got out of the tent when it was just about to start turning gray.
The ashes of the last night fire were dead yet two guys still sat nearby — a girl and a boy.
Probably, being foolish like me, they had tried to sleep at the edges, not in the middle of the group in their tent.

No bus came to pick us up.
Instead, a ‘goat'-Willys with a canvas top drove into the glade and we were told there happened some pickle. 
The collapsed tents and four girls filled all the room there was in the vehicle and the rest had to go to the city on foot carrying the two tent pillars, that did not fit into the ‘goat’, to the House of Pioneers.

It turned out that twelve kilometers on foot was a damn long distance, especially when dragging along a wooden tent pillar even though it's not too heavy. 
The guys from School 12 soon disappeared from view together with their pillar and we lagged behind diminishing in numbers because some people went ahead and we never caught up neither saw them that day. 
When we reached the tram stop in the city outskirts there remained only three of us: I, my classmate Sasha Skosar and the smooth green-paint-coated pillar of pine wood. 

(...I remember that we were dog-tired and hadn't the strength even for talking but that memory doesn't evoke any emotion. 
Perhaps, the emotions are dulled by repeated occurrences of the same state in the course of my life, yet the picture of a moose dissolving in twilight among the trees, which I can vividly see even now, calls a little smile to my lips – hey, Mr. Whopper, pass my best to Bamby!..)
