
In spring Father changed his workplace.
He moved from a locksmith at the Car Repair Shop Floor of the KaPeVeRrZe to the Shop Floor 19 at the Konotop Electro-Mechanical Plant, aka the KEMZ, aka "Red Metallurgist" Plant, also to a position of a locksmith. 
The salary of the KEMZ locksmiths was a trifle higher.
I did not know how much, I never was interested in such matters. 
After all, bringing money home was the care of Father and Mother.
I had cares of my own being up to my chin in the CJI, and the Club, and all sorts of Groups, and in books borrowed at the library. 
Well, and kerosene and water as well, but if they needed something from the Nezhin Store let them send Natasha or Sasha. 

Besides the salary, Father also earned some side money by repairing TV sets considered a hopeless case even by the specialists of the TV Repair Atelier.
About once a month after his day's work he would collect his pot-bellied satchel of green leatherette with a multimeter tester, the soldering iron, some radio spare parts and other equipment and leave until late at night. 
Then he’d come back, pretty sozzled, with a crumpled three rubles of earnings.
To the Mother’s scolding he'd answer:
‘Was it you to give the drink?’

Sometimes the procedure lasted for two evenings.
In the first Father came back home sober with neither money nor his satchel left at the client's hutta until the end of the repair. 

Especially complicated cases were brought to our hutta. 
Father put the dead TV on the table under the only window in the room, took off its case, which would go on top of the wardrobe, leaving on the table top just the entrails: the electronic tube and the skeleton of aluminum panels with radio lamps.
He would turn it over and over checking from all sides, muttering:
‘Well, so what's that that you want, then? Eh, dear girl?' 
 
In the dead of night I would be waked by sharp hissing – Father, in the niggardly light of the desk lamp, had brought bouncing white stripes running across the tube screen.
‘So, that’s why you refused to shoot! Was not loaded!’

Then for a couple of days, we watched the repaired TV (for its screen wider than that of ours) until the owner would come after it and take home the TV he'd already put a cross on. 
So, it’s not in vain that Father made the filings of those ‘The Radio’ magazines.

Mother also wanted to change her job but couldn’t find any other.
It was Father who helped her to get a job at the KEMZ.
He repaired the TV of the Personnel Manager and when asked about the charge, Father answered he did not want money, let his wife be given a job at the plant.
The Personnel Manager answered:
‘Okay. Bring her.’

At first, Mother could not believe it – six months before that very Manager told her flatly there were no jobs.
When the parents came together the Manager suggested Mother apply for a presser at the Pressing Shop Floor.
Though they worked in shifts there, the salary depended on their output and nobody took home less than a hundred of rubles. 

While Mother went to his secretary to fill the application form, the Manager laughed and told Father that he remembered her but the previous time he thought she was pregnant.
Pregnant women were not a good idea to give them a job.
They would work for one month and then get a year of paid maternity leave.
He wouldn’t be petted for giving jobs to pregnant.
But now he saw that it just so was her bodily structure.

That way Mother became a presser at the KEMZ.
She poured special powders into the molds of spare parts and switched the press on.
She worked two shifts – a week from eight to five, another week from five to half to twelve, with the shortened break for the meal.
In summer the press radiated the infernal heat and the molds were awfully heavy all year round.
After midnight the Konotop trams ran really rarely it took long waits to get from the KEMZ to the Over-Underpass.

But worse of all was pressing of the glass wool.
The fine glass dust made its way through the working robe and caused itching all over the body.
Even the after-work shower did not help.

But then in our hutta and in the yard there appeared a whole bunch of different boxes and thingamabobs made of plastic of different colors.
Mother brought home the defectively pressed spare parts or damaged at being pulled out from their molds.
So what if that one had a chink in the corner? It would make a classy modern ashtray.
Even Zhulka got a nice ribbed basin for drinking water.
All that because of ‘The Red Metallurgist' production was supposed for all kinds of units and safety systems in the mining industry. 

‘Mom,’ asked I, seemingly under the impression from one of the nihilist-authors,’What’s the meaning of your life? Why do you live at all?’
‘Why?’ answered Mother,’ To see how you grow up and become happy.’
And I shut up because at times I had brains enough not to be too clever...

The changes took place not only in our part of the hutta but in the whole of it.
One of the grannies-sisters from the Duzenko’s part returned to her village and the other moved to her daughter’s, somewhere in the five-story blocks of the Zelenchuk so that to rent her hutta to the lodgers.
A single mother, Anna Sayenko, moved in with her daughter Valentina. 

Valentina was a year older than me but didn't look so because of being short, red-haired, and skinny.
The nose was long though.
In the evenings she came out to play cards with the three of us, the younger and me, on the wide bench under the window by their porch.
A very comfortable bench it was – you could lean your back on the clay-plastered wall of the hutta in such an old whitewash that it left no traces.

During the game, taking advantage of the gathering twilight, I touched Valentina's shoulder with mine. 
So soft it was.
And everything began to swim…
She usually withdrew, but sometimes not immediately which made my pulse quicker, louder and hotter.
But then she stopped coming out for the game.
Probably, I squeezed too tightly into her shoulder. 

Father bought from the Duzenko’s son-in-law one of their two sections in the long mutual shed in the yard: the lean-to in the left end of the shed.
Once upon a time they kept a pig in that section and to make it warmer plastered with the cob its walls from outside. 
Father replaced the Ruberoid roofing felt with a tin roof, though not of new tin, of course.

Watching how dexterously he knocked a mallet interlocking the panels of the tin I was surprised how many skills he had and also the tools for all occasions. 
Take those tin-cutting scissors, for example, nothing of the kind was sold at stores.
And Scully too, whenever in need of a tool hurried to our hutta.
‘Uncle Kolya, gimme a drill.’
‘Uncle Kolya, may I take a needle file?’

In the wall opposite the entrance to the lean-to, Father inserted a hinged glazed frame like that in the veranda.
The electric wiring was run from our part in the shed, which was the next section, in fact. 
At his work, Uncle Tolik applied for waste crates, in which they brought to the RepBase chopper spare parts.
The crates were remodeled into the floor shields.
Thus the lean-to became Father’s workshop equipped with a vice and everything needed.
And the space by the wall, where the sloped roof did not allow to stand up in full of your height, became the stable for Uncle Tolik’s ‘Jawa’.

 As a result, our old section in the shed became roomier even with the remains of the long crate planks stacked under its low gable-roof. 
The leaves of the door from the kitchen to the room were taken out of the hutta for the summer season (with the door shut there hardly remained any air for breathing)and put upon the planks under the shade roof.

You’d find a good use for anything when giving it a thought.
A mattress put upon the door leaves turned the shed section into my summer dacha.
The bed-upon-the-door was at the height of the second sleeping bunk in a train car compartment, but wider.
On the nearby wall, Father fixed a sliding lamp with a tin shade and I could read at night as long as I chose. 
I also equipped my dacha with a small radio receiver ‘Meridian’.
It was given to Father by a customer grateful for the resurrection of his TV. 
The presented receiver, of course, did not work at all, but in a couple of weeks, Father found the necessary spare parts and my place became the second to none. 
You could read whenever you wanted or listen to the radio.
And, most importantly, no one would say ‘turn off the light!’ or ‘enough of that hurdy-gurdy!’

There was I lying alone by the cone of the light over pages in an open book till the midnight and past it.
Only dogs were barking in the yards of huttas of the nearby streets.
One dog would start, another snapped up, then still another continued the chain reaction of barking. 
Though our Zhulka hardly ever took part in their concerts, having grown too old and lazy.

That's interesting what would come if you put together all the dog barking adding even that beyond your hearing? 
For example, the dogs in the Settlement had calmed down and those in Podlipnoye began to bark and so on – over into the next regions and countries.
Then, probably, the dog barking would never subside on the Earth.
And that’s what they call the Planet of Humans, eh?

The best time for turning the receiver on was after the midnight.
Firstly, it's when they broadcast ‘The Concert After the Midnight' in which there was not only Georg Ots but Din Reed too. 
Then, from one to two o'clock: ‘For Those in the Sea’ which meant the sailors of merchant ships and fishing trawlers.
That’s where they put on air real rock’n’roll.
Well, clear enough, the sailors had seen oversea countries, Lyudmila Zykina alone and round the clock would not make them feel happy.
And from about four till almost six, there was jazz. 
Just two-three musicians: a piano, a double bass, and a drummer but what music they made! 
‘And now listen to the sketch ‘The Spring Mood’, please...’, and followed such a number – wow! Best of the best…
Well, at six they put on the hymn of the Soviet Union after which the usual ‘Mayak Radio Station’ poured out its usual hurdy-gurdy till next midnight...

Once I did not sleep all night.
Because at dawn I had to go to the Swamp by bike.
That time I brought hay, a couple of armfuls, from someone else’s haystack for our two rabbits.
The rabbits were given by Scully, he kept a lot of them in four or five cages, and Father told me to provide food for ours.

And then I thought that the day had already begun and what if to find out for how long I could go without sleep.
Somewhere around noon when I was playing chess with Seryoga Chun on their porch of their hatta next to the water pump, I felt that the sounds of talking came to me as if from afar and I didn't understand what exactly they were telling me. 
  
Yet I managed to find the way to my dacha... compartment ... sleeping bunk in ... compartment the

And when I got up it was light around – already or still?
I went to the kitchen in our hutta.
The cuckoo clock on the wall wagged its pendulum and showed five in the afternoon.
In the tear-off calendar stood the following date.
Had I slept more than a day?
Everyone laughed and said:
‘Phew! That’s a champion sleeper!’
Then it turned out that Uncle Tolik suggested to tear off one more page in the calendar while I was sleeping. 
I mean, those rabbits also did not stay with us for long... 

That Sunday I went to the Seim River by bike once again, but already alone.
The familiar road shot past much faster under the spokes, especially since I was traveling quite lightly – Sasha and Natasha were also going to come to the Bay Beach by 2:10 suburban train.
So, they’d bring me something to chew on.

How could I know that from cycling and so much swimming the appetite breaks loose? 
My stomach fell in.
And I could not already bear to see how people on the beach were calling their kids and grown-ups to their blankets on the sand to chew the brought delicacies sitting in a circle.
How long was it to wait yet?
And I pricked my ears up when at different ends of the beach different receivers tuned to the same ‘Mayak Radio Station’ began to announce the same exact time after the sixth sound signal ‘peee!’

At last, 2:10 to Khutor Mikhaylovsky rumbled along the bridge over the Seim.
Some ten minutes later from the first groups of the arrived folks appeared from the pine grove across the vast field.
However, neither in the first wave of newly arrived nor in the subsequent ones my brother and sister did not come.
What the heck?
We had arranged that I would wait for them on the beach.
Oh, I’d wolf a bull down, yes, I would, right away.

Then Sasha Plaksin who lived in the Gogol Street opposite the water pump came up to me. 
Natasha told him to tell me that they would not come because of we were going to the Uncle Vadya’s to celebrate his birthday and I had to come straight there.
‘Is that all? Nothing else?’
‘No.’
Well, that’s also right – why to stuff up your stomach before a birthday party?
And I started back to Konotop with my stomach stuck to my backbone…

The familiar road no longer seemed to be short.
The pedals grew heavy and I did not sprint anymore but strenuously turned them under the cheerless song of the robbers in the movie ‘Morozko': 
    "Oh! How hungry we are!. 
    Oh! How awfully cold!." 

The forest was over, the path along the railway embankment also ended and there still was more than half of the way ahead.
Until then I never really knew what meant ‘I wanna eat’.

When the big billboard ‘Welcome to Konotop!’ appeared at the road bend, I felt that I could go no further and turned into a grassy ditch stretching towards the forest belt.
And along the whole ditch not a single blade of some edible grass that ages ago we showed each other at the Object...
Nothing but sparysh and equally inedible dandelions...
And also those, with the small dry shots...
I pulled at their tops and chewed the softer part of the stem.
No, that was not food…
Okay. Just a little bit of rest in the ditch and the final leg to Uncle Vadya’s home…

I was the very first guest there.
Before that summer day, I always wrinkled my nose at lard and Mother would say: 
‘Would you have a marzipan on a silver platter then?!’
But ever after, I knew there was nothing tastier than a slice of lard on a piece of rye bread.

(...not kosher for someone?
A good news!
The bigger my share...)

In July the three of us, my brother and sister, and I, went to the military-patriotic camp in the town of Shchors.
The cards of admission were offered at our school, almost for free.
I had to put on a pioneer necktie again.

Shchors stood aside from the major railway lines so it took about four hours to get there by a diesel train.
The usual pioneer camp routine awaited us there: the 'dead hour' after the midday meal, occasional walks through the town to the river to bathe near the railway bridge.
Well, at least there was a library there.

Once there happened an unusual day though.
After getting up in the morning only guys came to the camp canteen.
The Senior Pioneer Leader announced that our girls had been kidnapped and after breakfast, we would go to the rescue. 

Well, an old good game for kids – Cossack-Robbers, the search for the captives following the arrows drawn on the sandy forest paths. 
When the forest ended changing into the even rows of a pine plantation, we came to a crossroads.
Where to now? 
We divided into small search parties and scattered in different directions. 

I and two guys went to the right.
The road returned to the forest edge and eventually led to a lonely hut behind a low fence.
Probably, a Forester's dwelling. 
Not a single alive creature in the silent yard, not even a dog. 
Under a tree near the hut, there was an empty coffin on the ground with the lid put aside. 
Well, did you really have a choice under such circumstances if Grandma Martha had read ‘Russian Epics’ to you?
Of course, I lay in the coffin and asked the guys to cover me with the lid, just as the hero Svyatogor asked the younger hero, Ilya of Murom.

They did as requested.
I lay in the narrow darkness (nothing scary at all) filled with a pleasant smell of shavings from the plane.
Then I tried to move the lid off, but it did not yield to my pushes.
Those guys, supposedly, got seated on it from above. 
I did not scream.
Being so well-read, I knew that any scream or shriek would only ring the coffin with an additional iron hoop, like the strikes of Ilya's sword at the coffin that trapped Svyatogor. 
I waited silently a little and then quite easily moved the lid off. 
All was so quiet and empty around.
The guys, probably, felt spooky sitting in a deserted yard on an ominously silent coffin and fled...

When I returned to the crossroads, everyone was already there and the kidnapped girls too because it was time to go back to the camp for the midday meal. 

I did not stay there until the end of the camp shift.
The Senior Pioneer Leader got a telephone call from the Konotop City Komsomol Committee that I had to go to the camp for the training of Komsomol activists in the regional center, the city of Sumy.

On the last evening, before I left, some local Shchorsian guys came to the camp intending to beat me up.
They even showed up in the mutual bedroom windows to communicate with their gestures that I was a dead man already. 
Maybe, I had flashed with an unpalatable retort to one of them when bathing in the river under the bridge or else some of the local girls, who also rested in the camp, had complained to them that I was an arrogant priggish smug.
They did not climb in because of the Pioneer Leader's presence. 

Later she escorted me to the barrack of the squad with my sister and brother to say goodbye before leaving early next morning...

In the training camp for Komsomol activists in Sumy we, four guys from Konotop, lived in a tent with four iron beds and our two compatriot-girls had a bedroom in a long one-story building.
In the camp, there was also the canteen in a separate building and a stage in front of rows of benches surrounded by half-dry cob-webbed pine trees. 
On those benches we sat recording in the block-notes which they had given us some lectures – I am damned if I remember what about. 
Now, in the camp of the Komsomol activists, the tent, where we slovenly lay around upon the cloth blankets, was just a tent with no magic shows of a shadow theater on any of its walls.

(...how much we lose when growing up…)

I was the youngest in the Konotop group.
The elder guys gave out plenty of chin music why ‘Volga’ of the latest make was preferable to ‘Pobeda’, and what was the right way of breaking a motorcycle in, and about a neighbor guy who married at the age of eighteen.
Could you imagine such a moron?
Got married when he still should be playing football with the guys in the yard.

One guy from our tent could play guitar. 
He borrowed it from someone in the long low building.
There were only two songs in his repertoire: one about the city to which you could hardly ever find the way and where people led with their chin when thinking or speaking out and preferred their lovers' hands to the apartments; and the other about skeletons walking in a file after a joint. 
And even with so limited numbers he always had an audience; the guitar strumming attracted guys from the nearby tents and girls from their bedrooms in the long building. 

I asked him to teach me guitar playing. 
He showed me two chords and I used them to train beating the rhythm of „eight“.
Deep furrows from the guitar strings disfigured the fingertips of my left hand. 
It hurt, but I really wanted to learn.

In the CJI game against the team of Sumy we lost, but not in the greeting contest for which I didn't plagiarize a single line from anywhere. 
We performed as aliens who had lost their way. 
    "It was Mars we were going to! 
    Yeah-yeah!
    It is you we've come to! 
    Yeah-yeah!.." 







