~~~ The  Adolescence ~~~

(...and, probably, that's it.
Enough is enough.
It’s time to roll the potatoes out of the glowing ashes before they turn firebrands too.
Coals are rich in kilo-calories but the taste is not what I’d like.
Besides, it’s getting pretty dark and I have no wish to overeat at late hours.
How does it run, that prescription of wise Arab dietarian: ‘...and the dinner leave to your enemy’?
Some useless wisdom.
Where would I get them those enemies from?
They'd formatted me to live in the society where each man is a friend, comrade, and brother to any other man. 
And, by the by, it’s so tempting to share the bullshit they’ve fostered you in and fed up to your ears.

One day I poured out a sermon on your elder step-sister, Lenochka, that all people were good and kind without really realizing how good they, actually, were, such a distressing pity.
And, as my damn stars would have it, there was Shakespeare's ‘Richard III' on TV that same evening. 
What a treat! 
She eating the tube with her eyes from while those kind and good people, unaware of their innate goodness, were strangling, torturing and cutting each other's throats.
And the next morning she watched the rerun too.
You can’t just give Shakespeare the shake, it’s classics.
Since then, I'm in a state of an armed neutrality against the TV. 

All that is said to emphasize the fact that even if I had an enemy I’d sooner give him my last shirt but not my dinner, especially when it’s potatoes backed in the fire ashes.
The moment you break their charred crust and pour a pinch of salt into their steamy core you see the light of Truth that no oysters, lobsters and other fancy kulebyaki can hold a candle to them.
Oh, no! 
I leave all kinds of freaky nourishment to abstruse gourmets ‘cause we, plain villagers, don’t care for too much: a good grub and the plum dough would do, thanks.
And were I a younger man but not a Negro advanced in my years and pressed by all kinds of problems in the course of the struggle for life, then to them and to them only would create I an ode of love and gratitude – to potatoes baked in the fire ashes.
No wonder, that in the most poignant episode in the books by Julian Semenov his main protagonist Stirlitz, aka Soviet secret service agent Isaev, dressed in the uniform of a Fascist officer bakes potatoes in the fireplace of his Berlin apartment to celebrate the Day of the Soviet Army and Navy. 
However, with all due respect to his nostalgic patriotism, no, sir – dat’s ain’t da thin’.
To understand the taste of baked potatoes you need to sit on the ground, under the open sky, with an evening like this one around you...)

In Konotop, Grandma Katya kissed, in turn, all of us in her kitchen and started crying.
Mother began to console her, then she noticed two kids’ heads peeking from behind the doors to the room.
‘They’re Luda’s kids?’ asked Mother.
‘Yes, they’re our Irochka and Valerik. So big kids already. She’s three years old and Valerik will soon be two.

Then their father, Uncle Tolik, came home from his work.
For the first time in real life and not in the movies I saw a man with a bald patch from his forehead to the back of his head, but I tried not to stare too much. 
An hour later he and I went out to meet my Aunt Luda.
The store she worked at closed at seven and she was always coming with bags from work.

Walking with Uncle Tolik, I studied the road to the Underpass, which the Konotopers were still calling Overpass.
I vaguely recollected a long wait before the railway barrier would rise to open the overpass built of wooden black-smeared sleepers between the rails and a crowd of people interspersed with a couple telega-carts drawn by horses and some truck rushed from both sides to cross the railway. 
At that time we were going from Konotop to the Object...

In my absence, they had built a high concrete tunnel under the multi-track railway hence the official name – Underpass, but folks kept calling it the old way – Overpass. 
On the other side of the Under-Overpass, long red trams were running from the City to the Station and back.
Aunt Luda had to arrive by one of those coming from the City.
Uncle Tolik persuaded me to approach her under the rare lights over the road tilting into the Under-Overpass, grab one of her bags and ask in a husky voice: 
‘Not too heavy for you?’
But she recognized me even though Uncle Tolik pushed the peak of my cap over my eyes.

We all together went to the Nezhin Street and Uncle Tolik was carrying the bags with food that Aunt Luda was taking from the store she worked at and paying for on her payday.
After going in and out of the Under-Overpass we crossed the Bazaar along its aisle between the empty at that hour counters with high lean-to roofs like those gazebos and having passed approximately as much more, turned into the Nezhin Street. 
There were two or three lights on log lampposts along its considerable length, but they were enough to distinguish it from the rest, unlighted streets. 

In Konotop, we arrived before the last quarter of the school academic year and went to School 13. 
The school was in the unevenly cobbled with fieldstones Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street, right opposite the Nezhin Street. 
Old folks called it ‘Cherevko’s school’.
Under the Tsar, some rich man from a nearby village of Podlipnoya, named Cherevko, built a two-story pub-house, but the then authorities didn’t allow him to open up because of pub's location too near to the factory – all the working class would become drunkards! – and Cherevko donated the house to a school of four classrooms.
In the Soviet era, they added to 'Cherevko's school' a long barrack-style one-story building also of bricks.
The addition stretched along a quiet side street sloping toward the Swamp, otherwise named the Grove separating the village of Podlipnoye from Konotop. 

I remembered how on my first visit to Konotop Aunt Luda and Mother took me to have a swim in a round pond near the village with the shores of dark soft earth smeared by ducks who swimming at the opposite shore...

On the way to school for the first time, I couldn't get the meaning of canvas pouches with long strings carried by many students along with their schoolbags or leatherette folders.
It turned out, they were carrying their ink-pots to write at the lessons.
The next morning the look was not new to me anymore, although the schoolchildren at the Object had long ago started writing with fountain pens which had ink-ampoule inside.
The ink was sucked in the ampoule through the pen and lasted for almost a week if you did not write too much.

After the deafening ding of a huge electric bell for a break, everyone was going out into the wide courtyard with an ancient tree in its center and the low building behind it that comprised the Pioneer Room, the workshop for Handicraft lessons, the school library and, as I learned later the ski storage room. 

The gym with its windows grated from inside to prevent smashing the panes with ball hits at PE lessons was attached at a right angle to the far end of the long one-story building.
The whitewashed brick hut of toilets stood opposite the blind wall of the gym.

All the break long the students crowded on and around the narrow high porch at the entrance door.
The bigger boys perched in rows on both iron railings at the head of the steps until a passing-by teacher would make them climb down and they'd reluctantly obey only to light back up after the teacher disappeared in the entrance doorway.
A lively trickle of students kept flowing to the toilets in the courtyard corner but the majority of boys, and only boys turned around the gym corner before reaching the white hut. 

There in the narrow passage between the gym and the high fence of the neighboring garden, life ran high in a brisk cash game for kopecks.
The school Las Vegas was playing ‘bitok’.
The average stake constituted two or three copper kopeks.
If you had nickels, say, ten, fifteen, twenty or even fifty-kopeck coin, it'd be exchanged at once.
The stakes were stacked on the ground, one coin atop another, each one with heads up.
Then a bitok came into play. 
What’s a bitok?
It’s hard to say – every player had his favorite piece of iron: a bolt, a railroad spike, a polished ball from a huge bearing – there were no limits, you could use whatever you wanted even a stone.
Even absence of any equipment was no problem: anyone would readily lend you his bitok for hitting.
Hitting what?
Yes, the stack of kopecks, of course.
All the coins turned over with your hitting and showing the tails, were yours.
Collect and put them in your pocket and hit the remaining stubborn heads. 
With no coin turned over, the next player started his tries.
And who opens the game?
The one with the highest stake in the stack.

Sometimes from the gym's corner a warning shout ‘shuba!' signaled approaching of some male teacher. 
The money immediately disappeared from the ground into the pockets, cigarettes hid in the hollowed palms. 
However, the alarm was always false – the teachers turned to the toilet where there was a boarded cabin for the Director and teaching staff. 

In just three games I lost fifteen kopecks, that Mother gave me for a cabbage pie from the school canteen.
And no wonder because the bitok virtuosos were trained their hands with their bitoks at home while I had to hit with a borrowed one.
Maybe for the better – I didn't have time to get addicted. 

On my first day at school the class Mistress, Albina Grigoryevna, planted me next to a skinny red-haired girl, Zoya Yemets. 
I didn't use Zoya's inkpot, yet my presence at her desk was all the same resented by Sasha Dryga, a grown-up double repeater with a greasy forelock down to his eyes.
After the lessons, he kept me aware of the fact.

And on the way home I made friends with my classmate Vitya.
His last name sounded a bit scary though it’s a commonplace one among the native Ukrainian family names – Skull.
Our friendship had a sound foundation – we both were going along the same Nezhin Street and he also lived in it only further, next to the Nezhin Store which was halfway from any of the street ends. 

The following day I asked Albina Grigoryevna for moving me to the last desk in the left row, to Vitya Skull, because we were neighbors and could help each other with home assignments.
And at the desk in front of us, there was sitting Vadya Kubarev, alone. 
That way was started our triple friendship.

The last names at school were, naturally, used only by the teachers, among the students Skull turned into Skully, Kubarev became Kuba and so forth.
What handle did I get?
Ogle or Goltz?
Neither.
If your name was 'Sehrguey', they did not bother about the last name and everyone automatically called you "Gray".

Friendship is power.
When the three of us were together even Sasha Dryga refrained from bullying.

Friendship is knowledge.
I shared poetry not included in the school curriculum but memorized by all the boys at the Object like ‘To get insured from the cold...’, and ‘The light was burning in the pub...’, and ‘Vaniyka-Halooy went to the fair...’ and other short but flowery pieces of rhymed folklore.
And they, in the context of cultural and philological exchange, explained me the meaning of the endemic expressions like ‘Have you fled from Romny?’ or ‘It’s time to send you to Romny.’
The town of Romny, about seventy kilometers from Konotop, was the seat of Regional Psychiatric Hospital for nuts.

That morning the bitok gambling battles behind the gym ran low.
On that clear April morning, the guys just stood and argued, and waited for confirmation of the rumors that the day before the Central Television news program ‘Time' was mistaken. 
Because of some guy had heard that the guys from School Ten said the last night a man with a parachute landed in the Sarnavsky Forest. 
Sasha Rodionenko, who continued to attend our school though his family had moved to the City center, would soon come.
He should know. 
He would confirm.

I remembered the flight of Gagarin and how Guerman Titov orbited all day long and in the evening he said:
‘Bye for now, I’m going to bed.’
And Dad laughed delightedly and said: 
‘That’s a good one!’

Our cosmonauts were always the first and we, the then boys, were arguing who of us was the first to hear the radio announcement of the flight of Popovich, Nikolayev, the first woman cosmonaut Tereshkova… 

Sasha Rodionenko came but he didn’t confirm anything.
So the news program ‘Time’ was not mistaken.
The sun faded in mourning.
Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov.
In the descending module.
Entering the dense layers of the earth atmosphere.
Perished.

Then Father came and a week later the iron container with our things from the Object arrived at the freight station. 
From there a truck brought the big wardrobe with the mirror on its door, the folding couch, two armchairs with wooden armrests, the TV set and other things and utensils. 

(...now I cannot but feel horrified – how was it possible for ten people: two families and the common Grandma Katya, to fit and live in the same room and kitchen?
But at that time I didn’t think of it at all because if it was our home and since we lived there the way we lived then it couldn’t be somehow different, everything was as it should be and I just lived on along and that’s all it was there to it…)

For the night Sasha and I unfolded the couch and shared it with Natasha, who lay across at out feet with a chair put next to the couch for her legs.
So I and my brother had to pull our feet up or Natasha would start grumbling and complaining to the parents on their bed at the opposite wall: let them tell me and Sasha to stop kick fighting.
Nice news! 
She could stretch her legs out as far as she wanted, but to my offers to swap places, she refused.
The family of Arkhipenkos and Grandma Katya slept in the kitchen...

About three hundred meters from the Nezhin Street and parallel to it went the Professions Street with the endless high fence of concrete slabs around the  Konotop Steam Engine and Car Repair Plant, in short KaPeVeRrZe. 
That’s why the part of Konotop on this side of Under-Overpass was named the KaPeVeRrZe Settlement, or just the Settlement.

On the other side of the Plant, multiple railway tracks separated it from the Station and the adjacent freight station where long freight trains waited for their turn to go further their ways because Konotop was a big junction station. 
At the freight station marshaling yard where they let the wagons roll from the hump into the sorting lines, there constantly sounded shrieking screech of brake blocks and bumps of wagons against each other and indiscernible screaming of loudspeakers about that or another train on that or another sorting line. 
However, in the daytime the marshaling yard Symphony was almost not heard in the Settlement, it needed the background of the night quietude... 

And when the wind blew from the local distillery in the nearby village of Popovka the air smelled unpleasant. 
Not that the stink too fatal but you'd better not to sniff attentively. 

The Nezhin street connected to the Professions Street by a number of lanes.
The first (when coming from School 13) was called the Foundry Street because it was directed at the former foundry of the Plant although not seen behind the concrete wall.
Then came the Smithies Street where the Plant’s smithery could be told by a tall brick chimney behind the same wall.
The next (past our house) was the Gogol Street though, of course, there was no Gogol, or any other writer for that matter, in front or behind the wall.
Those three streets were more or less straight.
Then up to the Nezhin Store followed a maze of differently directed lanes that also, in the end, led to the Plant wall if you knew how to navigate them. 

The Nezhin Store got its name because it stood in the Nezhin Street.
In a high one-story building there were four departments with separate entrances from the street:
‘Bread’,
‘Industrial Goods’,
‘Grocery’, and
‘Fish and Vegetables’.
The ‘Bread’ opened in the morning until they had sold all their loaves and ‘brick’ bread and then they locked it.
In the afternoon it opened again on the arrival of the bread wagon with another bunch of ‘bricks’ and loaves from the Konotop Bread Factory.
The next and largest department—‘Industrial Goods’—with two rows of showcases was manned with three bored saleswomen because they hardly had a couple of customers a day.
But the two saleswomen in the ‘Grocery’ department had their hands full all day long.
At times there even formed a queue on the days when the butter was brought in and they cut its huge yellow cube next to the scales with their enormously big knife and wrapped your two or three hundred grams into the blue friable paper.
If the Grocery was entered by a workman from the KaPeVeRrZe he was served without standing in the line because he handed over the already counted and readied amount of kopecks for vodka and no change was needed.
Besides, he had to return to his workplace as soon as possible for which end he hadn’t even changed from his boiler suites, aka spetzovka.
The choice of vodkas was extensive, of different colors and names: ‘Zubrovka’, ‘Erofeich’, ‘ Let’s Have One More...’ but people bought only ‘Moscow Vodka’ with its green and white sticker.

After the Nezhin Store, there were the Locksmith Street, the Wheels Street and in an unknown depth of the Settlement other streets and lanes... 

In the nearest Sunday after our arrival, Aunt Luda led me, and my brother and sister to the Professions Street that was the only asphalted street in the Settlement. 
Following it in the direction of the Bazaar, we came to the Plant Club for the three o’clock movie show for children.
The Plant Club was a mighty two-story building but as high as a four-story one.
The masonry of its walls and windows had lots of arches, ledges, and columns like a lace-work made of smoky bricks. 
The backside of the Plant Club was also surrounded by the concrete wall. 
In the small square in front of it, there also was the Plant Check-Entrance building in the same ornate ante-revolution masonry style. 

The high lobby of the Plant Club was full of diverse-aged children lining to the small window of the ticket office. 
One boy, a second-grader by his looks, leached Aunt Luda begging ten kopecks for a ticket for him but she yelled and he shut up.
She seemed to enjoy coming to the Plant Club for the afternoon show for children...

So I found out the way to the Club where, among other things, there also was the Plant Library of two huge halls.
The first one was furnished with desks covered by the filings of central newspapers and high cabinets with glazed doors, there stood familiar rows of unread works by Lenin, and Marx, and Engels and other multi-volume collections. 
The next hall had the stacks of normal books for reading. 
Of course, I enrolled immediately because the choice of books on the two shelves of our school library was niggardly poor...

On the May Day, our school went to the demonstration in the City. 
The column was decorated with the portraits on sticks in hands of the students (one portrait for three or four students to carry in turn) presenting the current Members of Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the  Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
Headed by the group of teachers, we marched along the cobble-stoned Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street to the Bazaar where the Professions Street shared its asphalt to the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street for its dive through the Under-Overpass. 
On the other side, the wide and long Peace Avenue opened stretching away under the high railway embankment in the distance, past the Zelenchuk, a housing area of five-story buildings, up to the central Peace Square. 
In the Peace Square, on the left side of the tangentially passing it Peace Avenue, opposite the round-wall basin of the never working fountain in front of the Peace Movie Theater, there stood the red platform past which the whole city marched in the holiday demonstrations, except for the tenants of the five-story buildings around the square – they watched the demonstration from their balconies. 
I envied them at first, but not for long.

On our way to the Square, the School 13 column had time and again to stop for long waits letting the schools of lower numbers go in advance. 
But the working organizations gave way to us: the columns of the Locomotive Depot, or the Railway Distance Of the South-West Railroad, as it was written in white bulging letters on the crimson-velvet covered shields at their columns heads.
No vehicles were seen along all of the Peace Avenue, only people, lots of people on foot which made the May Day so special and unlike other days.
And entering the Peace Square we had to suddenly change our dignified marching to a frivolous trotting as if running in an attack with the Members portraits atilt because, as it would turn out, of our lagging too far behind the previous column.

As School 13 was almost concluding in the march of schools at the demonstration (there were fourteen schools in Konotop) the moment we were passing the red platform the loudspeakers above it shouted:
‘The column of the Konotop Railway Technical College is entering the Square! Hooray, comrades!'
And we had to hooray to others and not ourselves. 

After the Peace Square and past the entrance to the Central Park, the road turned to the right and descended to the Lenin Street, but we didn’t go down there.
In the nearest lane, we piled the Political Bureau Members and red banners on a truck which took them back to our school to sit in the Household Manager's storeroom there till next demonstration. 

And we also went back bypassing the Peace Square because the passages between the building around it were blocked by empty buses and, behind them, militiamen walked around the empty Square. 
But it still was a holiday because before we started for the demonstration Mother was giving each of us fifty kopecks of which there even remained some change because a bar of wrapped in thin paper Creamy ice-cream cost 13 kopecks and Plombir – 18.
The saleswoman in white robes sold ice cream from their plywood double-walled boxes at every crossroads along the Peace Avenue. 

When I returned home, the schoolchildren in white holiday shirts were still walking along the Nezhin Street coming back to the Settlement from the demonstration.
And then I did the first dastardly act in my life.
I went out from the narrow gate and shot in the back of a passer-by boy with a crook pistol.
He chased me, but I ran back to the Zhulka’s kennel so the boy did not dare come up and only called me names...


In the summer my parents bought a nanny-goat from the Bazaar because, when Father received his first salary and brought home 74 rubles, Mother asked in bewilderment: 
‘How? Is that all?’

The white nanny-goat was meant to make living easier, but in fact, it only complicated life because I had to walk it on a rope into the Foundry Street or the Smithy Street to graze the dusty grass under plank fences. 
I refused to drink its milk although Mother kept wheedling that goat milk was very useful for health.
After a while, the goat was slaughtered and tenderized for cutlets but I refused even to try them... 

Sometimes Grandma Katya’s son, Uncle Vadya, came to our hutta at midday break at the Plant in his boiler oil smeared spetzovka.
Uncle Vadya had shiny black hair and a skin of olive hue, like that of young Arthur in the novel ‘Gadfly’ by Lilian Voynich, and the black toothbrush mustache.
He missed the middle finger on his right hand, it was cut off at the beginning of his working career. 
‘I couldn't get it first. Okay, that's my finger dropped on the machine tool, but where's the water dripping on it from? Aha! they're my tears!’ so described he the accident.
Doctors sewed up the stump very well, it turned out smooth and with no scars so that when he made the fig it came out two at once. 
The double-barreled fig looked very funny and no chance they could imitate the trick even remotely.

He lived in his mother-in-law's hutta in the vicinity of the Bus Station.
The Ukrainian language has a special term for a man living with his in-laws, it is ‘primak’, aka Acceptee.
Bitter is the share of an Acceptee! 
He has to be lower than the grass and quieter than water.
He must call his mother-in-law ‘Mommy’, show his respect to the hens she keeps in the yard and wash their legs when they go perching for the night.

We all loved Uncle Vadya – he’s so funny and kind, and always smiling.
And he greeted us in his special way:
‘Well, how are you, golden kids?’

At the age of ten, when a German Company Headquarters were just behind the wall – in the Pilluta’s part of the hutta, Vadya Vakimov climbed onto the hutta’s fence in an endeavor to cut the cable of occupants' telephone connection.
The Germans yelled at him but didn’t shoot and kill right on the spot.
When I asked why he dared to do that, Uncle Vadya replied that he no longer remembered.
Yet, hardly he wanted to become a hero partisan pioneer; to my mind, he was attracted by the multi-colored wires running inside the telephone cables...


On my way to the Nezhin Store, a pair of guys on one bike overtook me.
The one sitting on the trunk jumped off to the ground and gave me a strong slap on the cheek.
Of course, it was an unlimited dishonor but though he was half a head shorter than me, I didn’t fight back in fear of his companion who also got off the bike – the guy was indisputably bigger.
‘I told you’ll be let have it!’ said the offender and they left.
I realized whose back I had shot at with a crook...


The movie shows at the Club started at six and eight in the evening.
The film-goers had to go up the wide dark-red-paint-coated thick-board steps to the second floor. 
The tiled landing up there was always murky despite the two high windows and three doors.
The door to the right opened a small hall with a TV set in front of a dozen rows of seats and a flight of steep iron stairs to the projectionist booth.
On both sides of the TV set, two more big doors led to the spacey hall of the Ballet Studio. 
And now back again to the tiled landing with two more yet unexplored doors.

The first door to the left was always locked because it led to the audience balcony.
And, finally, the next door was open and watched by invariably grim auntie Shura standing by in her helmet-like head kerchief to tear away the check part of your ticket when you entered the hall. 

The floor inside had a slight slant towards the wide screen behind which there was a big stage with two porches and doors by the walls. 
For concerts or puppet theater performances the cinema screen was drawn to the left wall disclosing the dark-blue plushy velvet of the stage curtains.
The open balconies with plaster moldings ran along the side walls yet they didn’t reach the stage.
At the rear wall, the balconies sloped steeply from both sides so as not to block the loopholes of the projectionist booth from where the widening beam of flicking light stretched to the screen with a movie. 

In the lobby on the first floor, next to the window of the ticket office, there hung the film list for the current month painted upon a big frame of the canvas.
Films changed every day except for Monday when there was no cinema at all.
So you could make your choice in advance and ask from Mother twenty kopecks for a ticket.

In summer the cinema expenses completely disappeared.
The Plant Park behind the long dilapidated two-story apartment block, which stood above the descent to the Under-Overpass, was a great money-saver.
In the Park, apart from its three alleys, a locked dance floor, and a big gazebo beer pavilion, there also was the open air cinema behind a pretty high plank fence. 
That fence had enough of convenient gaps and holes in and between the planks in the rear part of the audience.

The show began after nine, almost yet at twilight.
Under the condition, there were at least four spectators who bought their tickets.
The younger generation preferred watching films from outside the cinema.
However, standing at a hole for an hour and a half with your nose buried in planks roughed by merciless time and bad weather was not exactly what you’d call a comfortable pastime.
That’s why the film-going guys took advantageous places in the old apple trees behind the brick structure of the projectionist booth.
If your bough or fork in the tree was not too comfortable next time you'd come earlier and have a better choice of the tree seats. 

The film went on, the warm summer darkness thickened around two or three lamps in the Plant Park alleys and the stars of the night sky flew in the gaps in the apple tree foliage. 
‘The Merry Guys’ with Leonid Utesov were slapping each other with drums and double basses on the silver screen and in less enchanting moments you could stretch out your hand to grope among the apple-tree twigs and find, somewhere between the Cassiopeia and Andromeda constellations, a small inedible crab-apple to tinily bite bitter bits off its stone-hard side.

After a good film, like the one with Rodion Nakhapetov – without fights, wars, but just about life, about death and a beautiful motorcycle riding through shallow water, the spectators walked out of the Park gate to the cobbled Budyonny Street without the usual whistles and yells.
They became a quiet sparse crowd of people as if related by the watched film and now walking through the darkness of a warm night, dwindling at the invisible crossroads, on their way to the lonely lamppost at the junction of Bogdan Khmelnitsky and Professions Streets, next to the Bazaar... 

But the main thing because of what the guys were waiting for the summer was, certainly, bathing.
The start of the swimming season took place late May at the Kandeebynno and served the sign of summer coming into its own. 
The Kandeebynno’s a number of fish lakes for breeding of the mirror carp, and the spring head of the Yezooch river.
At times along the lakes’ dams there rode a solitary bicycler-overseer so that guys wouldn’t arrogantly poach with their fishing poles.
And in the last of the lakes they didn’t breed the carp, it was left for bathing of beach-goers.

But to go for a swim at the Kandeebynno you had to know how to get there.
Mother said that she had been there but couldn’t explain the way and it was better to ask Uncle Tolik who both to work and back, and, actually, everywhere went by his motorbike ‘Jawa’; he really was who should know.

The Kandeebynno, according to his instruction, was easy to find.
When going to the City center along the Peace Avenue you pass under the bridge of the railway embankment, take the first right turn.
To miss the turn's impossible because of it's the highway to Romny.
Then follow the road to the intersection where again take to the right and go on until you see the railway barrier.
Cross the railway, turn to the left and here you are – that's the Kandeebynno for you. 

The younger ones, sure enough, pressed for going with me.
We took an old bed cover to lay upon when sunbathing, put it into a mesh-bag, added a bottle of water and went to the Over-Underpass where the Peace Avenue starts.
Up to the railway embankment, the road was known from the May Day demonstration. 
We went under the bridge and saw it at once – the road to the right along the embankment’s base.
Actually, it didn't look a highway because of having no asphalt, yet it was wide enough and it was the first one to the right after the bridge.
We turned and followed it walking along the base of the high embankment.
However, the further we went, the narrower the road became transforming into a wide path, then into a tread and then just disappeared.

So we had just to climb the grass-overgrown embankment, shake the sand out from our sandals and go further stepping on the concrete sleepers or along the iron railheads.
Natasha was the first to notice the trains catching up from behind and we stepped down onto the uneven rubble in the ballast shoulder giving way to the rumble of the wind-whipping cars shooting past us. 
When we reached the next bridge there was no avenue or a street under it, just railway tracks.
Our embankment turned right and started gradually go down to the distant Railway Station.
It became clear, that we were going in the opposite direction and not to the lakes of the Kandeebynno at all.
We did not have time to get too disappointed because far below we noticed a small field at the base of another embankment under the bridge in ours.
Two groups of tiny at that distance guys in light summer clothes and with the mesh-bags like ours and walked towards a grove of green trees, and they even had a ball too.
Where else could they go if not to a beach?!

We climbed down two steep embankments and went along the same path in the field as the previous guys long gone from the sight.
Then we walked through the aspen grove along a lonely railway track with no crushed stone ballast between the wooden sleepers until we reached a highway crossing the track under two raised barriers.
We crossed the highway and followed a wide, at times boggy path among the tall growth of bright green grass.
 The chest straightened out with cautious exaltation: 
- Aha, the Kandeebynno! You won’t flee now!
 Groups of people were walking the same path in both directions but guys going there were more than back-goers.

The path led to a wide canal of dark water between the shore and the opposite dam of the fish lakes and went further along the canal.
We went on and on between green trees, under white clouds in the azure-blue summer sky.

The straight rows of fruit-trees of the no one’s neglected garden rose up a smooth slope to the right of the path.
Then the canal on the left widened into a lake with a white sand beach.
The stretch of sand turned into the grass between the tall currant bushes of the neglected garden.
We chose a free stretch of grass for our bed cover, undressed hastily and ran over unbearably hot sand to the water which was flying and splashing from each and in every direction under the incessant screams and yells and laughter of dozens of people in it. 
Summer! 
Ah, Summer!

Later it turned out that Uncle Tolik hadn't even known there existed that dwindling road along the embankment base.
When his motorcycle at a roaring speed shot from under the bridge in the Peace Avenue he in two seconds reached the Romny highway but going on foot you had to tread to it for more than hundred meters.

In the list of films at the Club for July there stood ‘The Sons of Big Bear' and Skally and I decided to go to the show because we knew that Goiko Mitich starred there as one of her sons. 
Roles of red-skins was Goiko Mitich's specialty and, as long as he was in, it would be a decent film. 
The list, sure thing, did not report all those details or anything else but the title. 
However, the films reached the Club of KaPeVeRrZe a month, or maybe two, after they were shown at the Peace Movie Theater or at the Vorontsov Movie Theater in the Square of Konotop Divisions that's why with the little help of our friends we could take a right choice. 
The reason we didn't rush to the central Movie Theaters was not only in our trust to friends who could give a wrong lead after all but the fact that a ticket at the Peace Movie Theater cost fifty kopecks, at the Vorontsov thirty-five and at the Plant Club mere twenty kopecks! 

That Sunday the three of us—Kubsa, Scally, and I—drove to the Kandeebynno by bikes.
We swam, we made a spring-board for each other, in turn, standing chest-deep in the water with two of us clasping hands for the third to climb upon and dive from.
And, of course, we played ‘spots’, though you couldn’t catch up Kuba in diving.
Then they both got lost somewhere in the crowd of people in the water.

I looked for my friend among the squeals and splashes but couldn't find them anywhere. 
I swam to the other shore, to the dam of the fish lakes.
A couple of guys were fishing there with their eye alert for a convenient opportunity to angle in the mirror carp paradise on the other side of the dam.
I swam back so as not to scare away their fish which could be caught even in the lake for swimmers.
Then I once again scanned the crowd in the water – to no avail, and decided to go ashore. 

Chilled through and through I got to the fry-pan hot sand of the beach when two of them ran from the currant bushes with the hair on their heads almost dry. 
‘Where the hell were you? We’re getting in again. Let’s go!’
‘What a bunk! I’m just getting out!’
‘So what? Let’s go!’
‘Ah, damn! Off we'll drive the City boys!.' 

And we three, whipping up foamy splashes with our running feet rushed to deeper places to dive, and yell, and hoo-ha.
Summer is summer when it is summer…

Kuba did not want to the movies – he had already seen that western, and Scally also changed his mind.
That fact didn’t stop me and I decided to take twenty kopecks from Mother and go to the Club all the same.
At home Grandma Katya told that my parents had left two hours before together with my brother and sister. 
And she didn’t know where they went.
Well, Okay, there were three hours more before the next show at the Club – enough time for them to come back.
At the end of the third hour, I was overcome by unconquerable anxiety, 
Where could they be?
I again asked about it but that time Aunt Luda.
With complete indifference and somewhat chafed she answered:
‘I wouldn’t even have seen you.’
She always became like that when Uncle Tolik was gone fishing.

Two more hours passed, I was late for the show but I didn’t want no cinema no more.
The feeling of an unavoidable and already accomplished catastrophe had eaten into me.
Some truck having run on the sidewalk and vague ambulance sirens were snaring me. 
And only one thing was clear – I no longer had any parents or any brother and sister. 

The dark thickened.
Uncle Tolik pulled up in the street and brought his ‘Jawa’ bike into the yard coming back from his fishing.
He went to hutta and I, crushed by my grief and loneliness, was sitting on the grass next to sleepy Zhulka.
It was already quite late when the iron handle-hook of the wicket clinked.
Sasha and Natasha ran into the yard followed by Mother’s cheerful voice.
I rushed to meet them torn apart between joy and resentment.
‘So and where were you?’
‘Visiting Uncle Vadya.’ Mother said. ‘And what’s up with you?’

I burst into tears confusedly muttering about bear sons and twenty kopecks because I couldn’t explain that I had lived half of that day after the loss of all of them not knowing what could I do without the family.
‘Why didn’t you ask money from Aunt Luda?’
‘So? I did ask and she said she wouldn't like to see me too.' 
‘What? Come on into the hutta !’
And at home, she quarreled with her sister and Aunt Luda said it was all bullshit and she'd only said she wouldn't see me too if I hadn't come. 
But I obstinately repeated my bullshit.
Mother and Aunt Luda shouted at each other louder and louder.
Grandma Katya tried to calm them down – what a shame and the neighbors would hear and the people in the street too. 
Natasha, Sasha, Irochka, and Valerik with frightened eyes crowded in the doorway between the kitchen and the room where Father and Uncle Tolik were sitting silently before the TV set. 

That's how I committed the second meanness in my life – slandering innocent Aunt with false accusations.
Although I had understood her response exactly the way I related to Mother but after the Aunt's interpretation I could admit that, yes, she had answered with those words, however, I did not. 

After the brawl in the hutta I felt guilty before Aunt Luda and her kids, and before Mother, who I lied to, and before everyone because of I was such a sissy ready to wimp like a mommy's son: ‘woe is me! I'm left alone!' 
All of that triggered a slow and inconspicuous process of my alienation and transformation into a ‘cut off piece’ as Father used to say.
I began to live a separate life of my own although, of course, I did not realized or felt anything of the kind but just lived.

Mother and Aunt Luda made up with each other because Aunt Luda showed Mother how to correctly sing the popular at that time ‘Cheremshina blossoms everywhere’ and she was bringing home food you couldn’t buy anywhere.
At all the stores it was sold under the counter to only trusted people or those you would need.

It was fun to listen to Aunt Luda’s tales about the midday-meal break at their store.
All the saleswomen came to their locker room and bragged before each other about the delicatessens they brought that day from home in their glass half-liter jars.
Comparing, making judgments and statements.
Exchanging the recipes.
The store manager ate separately in her office.
When there was a telephone call she answered and yelled the name of the one wanted by the caller.
The saleswoman went to the manager's office to speak on the phone and—however short the talk—by her return there remained hardly one-third in her jar because of everyone was eager to check the taste. 
It’s better once to lick than hundred times to look at, you know…
But there’s one real smartie at the store.
Whenever the manager called her to the phone she put her spoon aside did ‘khirk!’ and – spat into her jar. 
Ugh!
And with no haste would she leave for her phone conversation. 
And no one would ever touch her meal.

Mother also went to work in the trade and got the job of a cashier in the big Store 6 near the Station. 
However, two months later she had a major shortage there.
Mother was very worried and said she couldn’t make such big a mistake.
Possibly, someone of the store workers knocked out a check for a large sum when Mother went to the toilet forgetful to lock the cash register.
Selling of the Father’s coat made of natural leather which he bought while working at the Object, helped out of the pickle.
After that Mother worked in retail outlets without suspicious colleagues, just the seller alone – in the stalls of the Central Park by the Peace Square where they sold wine, biscuits, cigarettes and draft beer...

By the end of the summer there again was a brawl in our hutta.
It was not a sisterly quarrel already but a scrap between a husband and his wife.

Uncle Tolik had a ride to the forest and brought mushrooms from there wrapped in a newspaper.
Not a too big harvest but enough for a pot of soup.
The newspaper package was tied up accurately not to scatter the mushrooms on the way.
Then he put them into a bag and hung it on his motorcycle steer.
However, at home instead of grateful praise, he got a shrill tongue-lashing from Aunt Luda when she saw that the newspaper package was tied up with a strap from a female bra. 
Uncle Tolik kept repeating that he just picked up 'the damn string’ in the forest but Aunt Luda shouted louder and louder that she’d like to see a forest with bras strewn around bushes and that there was no need in trying to make a fool of her because she was not born the day before.
Grandma Katya no longer tried to appease the quarrelers and only looked at them with sad eyes.
That’s how I learned what ‘bra strap’ was.

Uncle Tolik never again went after mushrooms.
Aunt Luda wanted to forbid even his fishing but then he began to raise his voice until they agreed on a compromise – he was allowed to go fishing when he took me with him.
So the following two or three years from spring to autumn every weekend with a pair of fishing rods and a spinner hitched to the trunk of his ‘Jawa' we set off to fishing. 
Mostly we rode to the river of Seim.
At times we fished in the Desna river, but in that case, we had to leave home at dark because it was a seventy kilometers ride there. 

Roaring with its engine ‘Jawa’ shot through the empty streets of the night city when even the militia slept.
After thirty kilometers along the Baturin highway, we got to the Moscow highway where Uncle Tolik sometimes squeezed out of the motorcycle one hundred and twenty kilometers per hour. 
When we turned off onto the field roads the dawn was already catching up with us. 
I sat behind clasping him by the waist with my hands in the pockets of his motorcyclist jacket of artificial leather so that they wouldn’t freeze away under the headwind.

The night around transformed into slowly brightening twilight, forest belts grew up around the fields, high in the sky the clouds became pink in the long rays of the sun which hadn’t yet risen above the horizon.
Those views were no less breathtaking than a high-speed ride. 

Our usual bait were worms from the kitchen garden, but once experienced fishermen advised Uncle Tolik to bait the hook with dragonfly larvae.
Those creatures live underwater in clods of clay by the high river bank and the fish just went crazy about them fighting each other around the hook with a larva...

We drove up to the river bank in a murky twilight.
The river lapped sleepily under thin wisps of fog rising from the water.
Uncle Tolik explained that it was me who had to get those lumps of clay onto the bank.
Just the thought of entering that dark water in the withdrawing night threw a shiver up the spine but a good ride deserved a good dive.
I undressed and, on the advice of the elder, dived headlong into the river. 
Wow! It turned out that in the water it was even warmer than on the bank!

I dragged slippery lumps to the bank and Uncle Tolik broke them there and picked the larvae out from the tunnels they had drilled in the clay.
When he said it was enough I even didn’t want to leave the streaming warmth of the river.

And all the same, that was a merciless exploitation of adolescent labor for which I punished Uncle Tolik that very day.

He preferred a spinner to a fishing rod sending the lure with a sharp throw to a splashdown almost in the middle of the wide river and then spun the reel on the spinner handle pulling the zig-zag flapping-flashing lure back. 
Predatory fish, like pine or bass, chased it and swallowed the hooks in the tail of the lure, if the fisherman luck would have it. 

By noon we moved to another place with a wooden bridge across the river.
Uncle Tolik went over to the other, steep bank and proceeded along throwing the lure here and there.

I watched the floats of the two fishing rods and then stretched out in the grass.
When Uncle Tolik was returning on the opposite bank I didn’t raise my head and looked as he was struggling through the jungle of knotgrass and other growth.
That’s a special effects trick in movie making.
Up to the very bridge, I kept him in the role of a Lilliputian. 

Once Aunt Luda asked me if I had ever seen him visiting some hutta on our fishing rides.
I was absolutely honest and did not lie saying, no, I hadn't. 
As for that time in the Popovka village when he suddenly remembered that we were riding without any bait and dropped me off in an empty village street to wait while he'd ride to some place—not too far off—to dig up worms and be back, all I had seen was the blackened straw in a barn roof, the soft sand of the road, and the thickets of nettles on its sides. 
That’s why I had no scruples when saying ‘no’ to Aunt Luda’s question.

We had had a fall just a couple of times.
The first time while riding through the field along the path on top of a meter high embankment with the tall grass flying by on both sides.
Because of the grass was lower than us, I guessed it was an embankment, but what for among the fields? 
That was the question.
In one place the embankment broke off but the tall grass hid the pit into which ‘Jawa' nosedived after a long jump through the air and threw us both far ahead of itself. 

The other time we had hardly started our ride along the Nezhin Street when the motorcycle got tripped by a piece of iron piled near someone’s hutta so that vehicles when bypassing puddles would not scratch its foundation.
However, both times we got no injuries except for bumps because on our heads there were white plastic helmets.
Only after the fall in the Nezhin Street, the fishing had to be canceled because ‘Jawa's' absorber began to leak oil and needed an urgent repair... 

The Square of Konotop Divisions, called so in honor of the Soviet Army detachments that liberated the city, at first seemed to me being at the end of the world because it's four tram stops from the Peace Square, to which it took the same number of stops from the Station. 
The Square of the Konotop Divisions was as wide as three roads put side by side and had a slight slant along its entire, considerable length.
By its upper right edge there stood a metal tower like the famous one in Paris only more useful because the Konotop’s tower held a huge water tank on its top with the painted inscription ‘I love you, Olya!’ on its rusty side overlooking the Square of Konotop Divisions.
Below the tower, behind the high wall with dense rows of barbered wire, was the city prison.
Opposite the tower, a high brick gate opened to the City Kolkhoz Market and next to it a number of stores went along the slope of the square: ‘Furniture', ‘Clothes', ‘Shoes'… 
At its lower end the square was bordered by a high building with more windows than walls — the Konotop Sewing Factory, followed by a low building with more walls than windows — the City Sober-up Station, and then flew into a street leading to the dangerous outskirt area of Zagrebella.
The danger lay in rascal scamps who were catching guys from other city districts seeing Zagrebella’s girls home.
They would make their victim to imitate the rooster cry or measure the Zagrebella bridge with a match or simply beat him up.

The tram-track rails divided the Square of Konotop Divisions bend-sinister below the blind wall with three exit doors from the Vorontsov Movie Theater which was entered from the Lenin Street. 

When a mobile menagerie arrived in the city they would arrange their trailers and cages into a big square camp between the Sewing Factory and the tram tracks.
It looked like the Czech Taborites defense camp from the History of the Middle Ages school book. 
Only in the middle of their corral of wagons, they added two rows of cages, back to back, for the thick crowd of Konotopers and folks from the nearby villages to walk around them and along the cages in the mobile wall. 
The signs on the cage gratings announced the name and age of the inmate and a swash-like hum of the crowd rumble interspersed with shrieks and roar of caged animals hang over the Square of Konotop Divisions.
That happened once every three years.
 
A couple of times the Wall of Death riders visited the city too.
They erected a high tarpaulin tent with a ring of five-meter plank walls inside.
Two times a day they let the on-lookers in to climb under the tent roof and crane over the wall top watching how they circled arena on two motorcycles to gain the speed enough to get over the ramp onto the wall and bucket along in a horizontal plane with the deafening crash of the motors... 

When you left the Square of Konotop Divisions along the Lenin Street, next to the Vorontsov Movie Theater there was the three-story cube of the House of Householding with all kinds of repair workshops and ateliers.
A stand made of iron painted pipes stood by its wall.
It was crowned with the inviting headline ‘DO NOT PASS BY!’
Black and white photos of people who had got to the Sober-up Station hang there in glazed frames with the paper slips reporting their names and what organizations they worked at. 
Some creepy pictures they were as if of faces got skinned or something. 
I felt pity for those alcoholics.
Probably, because of that far away stand at the Object which I had been so much feared to approach.
I had some affinity if not with them then at least with their kids. 

Further on along the Lenin Street past a crossing, the House of Culture of the Red Metallurgist Plant stood a little way back from the road, behind the tiny square of its own. 
On both sides of that square, there was planted a stand with glue-mounted pages from satirical magazines – the Russian ‘Crocodile’ on the left and the Ukrainian ‘Pepper’ on the right.
Between each stand and the road, there was put a tin and glass stall – ice-cream and lemonade by the ‘Crocodile' and all sorts of knick-knackery by the ‘Pepper'. 
There, among motley trifles, I saw sets of matchbox stickers and on my next trip to the City, I bought the set with pictures of animals. 

When I brought the purchase home to fill up the collection album brought from the Object I realized it wouldn’t be right.
The older stickers collected from matchboxes had the address of their match producing factory and 'the price – 1 kopeck' while the set from the stall was just a pack of sticker-sized pictures. 
Since then I’d lost all interest in the collection and passed it to my friend Scully...

Scully lived near the Nezhin Store with his mother, and grandmother, and the dog named Pirate.
Their house was very small – a kitchen and a bedroom that would fit into the room of our hutta, but it was a detached dwelling.
Next to their hutta there stood a shed with clay plastered walls where, apart from usual household tools and a section for coal to burn in winter, there also stood a pull-barrow – an elongated box resting on two iron wheels and a long iron pipe ending with a crossbar which to drag it along.
Between the hutta and the wicket to the street, there stretched a long garden (not two or three vegetable beds of ours) enclosed by the neighbors’ fences on both sides.
In the autumn and in the spring I came to help Scully with turning the soil in their garden.
Jabbing the spades in the ground we repeated the fashionable Settlement saying:
‘No Easter cake for you! Get a bun and go dig the garden!’
And the released Pirate frisked wildly about the cherry trees along the narrow path to the wicket...

When we moved to Konotop my responsibility became providing our hutta with water.
The enamel buckets with water stood in the dark corner of the tiny veranda on two stools next to the kerosene stove.
From a nail in the wall above the buckets there hung a dipper for drinking or filling a pan with water.
Besides, water was needed in the washstand tank standing in the kitchen.
It also held two buckets of water.
The tap sticking out from the tank bottom above the sink leaked water when pressed from beneath as those taps in the toilets of passenger trains.
And under the sink, there was the slop compartment with a door for the bucket to collect the soapy water. 
When the sloppy bucket got filled it had to be taken out and emptied into the spill pit in the garden.

The water for our hutta I was fetching from the water pump on the corner of Nezhin and Gogol Streets – some forty meters from the gate.
With a bucket hung on the pig-iron nose of the pump, you had to push down the iron handle behind it and the thick stream of water banged into the bucket and if you didn't watch out it would immediately overflow and run onto the road. 
Two daily water-walks (that is four buckets) were enough for our hutta if, of course, there was no washing that day.
On a day of Aunt Luda doing washing for her family, the water was brought by Uncle Tolik. 

When the rains set in the water-walks became a little longer – you had to navigate between the wide puddles in the street.
In winter the pump got surrounded by a small but very slippery skating rink because of spilled water, the ice had to be walked carefully.
The log lamppost by the pump was put in the really right place...

And I was also in charge of bringing fuel for the kerosene stove.
That stove looked like a small gas stove with two burners, only it had two bowls behind to be filled with kerosene. 
Kerosene soaked the asbestos wick that was lighted with a match to cook a dinner, to heat up water for tea or washing on yellow flames bordered with a black edge of soot.

After kerosene, I had to go to the Bazaar with a twenty-liter tin canister. 
In the corner away from the Bazaar counters, they put a big cubic tank of rusty sheet iron. 
The day of kerosene selling was announced with the chalk writing on the tank side – ‘kerosene will be ...’ and then followed the date when it would be brought.
However, so many dates had changed each other—wiped and written over and over again—that no date could be discerned in the white chalk spot, so they just stopped writing and there only remained unchangeable, full of optimism inscription:
‘kerosene will be …!' 

A shallow trench under the tank side accommodated a short pipe from its bottom with a tap blocked by a padlock.
On the announced day a saleswoman in a blue satin robe descended into the trench and sat by the tap on a small stool brought along.
She brought and put under the tap a multi-liter aluminum cauldron, took the padlock away and filled the vessel with the yellowish foamy jet of kerosene, not to the very brim. 
The queue started moving to her with their bottles, canisters, and cans which she filled with a dipper through a tin funnel collecting the pay into her blue pocket.
When the dipper began to knock on the cauldron bottom, she turned on the tap and added the fluid.

By the by, they didn’t need to write the date at all because Grandma Katya each morning visited the Bazaar and two days ahead brought the news when there would be kerosene.
So, on the kerosene day after coming from school, I took the canister and went to spend two or three hours in the line by the rusty tank. 
Sometimes they sold kerosene in the yard of the Nezhin Store equipped with the same tank, but that happened less often and the line was no shorter...

After the summer holidays, I was elected Chairman of the Pioneer Squad Council of our 7th ‘B' grade because the former Chairman (the red-haired Yemets) moved to some other city together with her parents. 
At the Pioneer Squad meeting, two of the nominees announced self-withdrawal without going into the details and the School Pioneer Leader pushed my candidacy. 
When I started sluggish excuses he energetically clarified – all that was not for long because we all soon become members of the Leninist Young Communist League – Komsomol.

(...the structure of the pioneer organizations in the Soviet Union is an awesome example of precise and well-thought-out organizing of any organization. 
In each school every class of the corresponding age became a Pioneer Squad divided into Pioneer Rings.
The Ring Leaders together with the Chairman of the Squad formed the Council of the Pioneer Squad. 
The Chairmen of the Pioneer Squads were the members of the School Pioneer Company Council.
Then there came District or City Pioneer Organizations converging into Republican ones of which was already formed the All-Union Pioneer Organization.
Such a crystal-structured pyramid for you.

That is why the heroes of the Komsomol resistance underground during the German occupation of Krasnodon city did not have to reinvent the wheel.
They used the all too familiar structure, only renamed ‘rings’ into ‘cells’.
If, of course, we take for granted the attestation in the novel ‘The Young Guard’ written by A. Fadeyev.
He composed his work basing on the information from the Oleg Koshevoy relatives.
As a result, in his work he made Oleg the leader of the underground and Victor Tretyakevich, who accepted Oleg to the resistance organization was depicted as a traitor under the name of Stakhevich. 
Fourteen years after the novel publication, Tretyakevich was rehabilitated posthumously and posthumously awarded an order because he did not die in the Soviet NKVD camps but was executed by the fascist invaders. 
By the early sixties a few more secondary traitors, whose names the writer did not bother to change, had served ten to fifteen years in the NKVD camps and were also rehabilitated.

The writer himself had already put a bullet through his head in May 1956, shortly after his participation in the meeting of Nikita Khrushchev, the then leader of the USSR, with the survived young guardsmen of Krasnodon.

At that meeting, Fadeyev inadequately shouted at Khrushchev in front of all the present calling him names not good at that time and two days later he committed suicide. 
Or else, they committed his suicide, although, of course, such an expression—‘they committed his suicide’—is unacceptable by the norms of the Russian language.

Hence the moral – even the finest structure cannot guarantee you from failure if your pyramid is not made of stone…)

When at the end of September Chairman of our School Pioneer Company fell ill, I was sent to the City Pioneer Organization Account Meeting of the Chairmen of School Pioneer Company Councils.

The Meeting was held in the Konotop House of Pioneers in a quiet nook behind the monument to the fallen heroes above the Lenin Street.
According to the regulations, an Account Meeting should have its Chairman and Secretary. 
The Chairman would announce whose turn it was to account and the Secretary would take notes of how much waste paper and scrap metal was collected by the pioneers of the reporting Chairman's school during the accounting period, which cultural events were organized and what places were taken by their pioneers in the city-wide competitions. 
The Pioneer Leader of our school had supplied me with a sheet of paper to be read at the Account Meeting but in the House of Pioneers, I was charged with the additional responsibility of the appointed Chairman of the Meeting. 

They told me that presiding an Account Meeting was as easy as a pie.
All you had to do was to announce ‘now the floor for the accounting report is given to the to Chairman of the Pioneer Company Council from school number such-and-such!’ after which the such-and-such Chairman would rise to the podium on stage with their sheet of the report.
When done with reading, the accounting Chairman would leave the paper to the Secretary of the Meeting – what the point in sticking down all those figures on the fly if they had been already written, right?

At first, everything went without a hitch. 
I and the Secretary of Account Meeting, a girl in a white shirt and the scarlet pioneer necktie as anyone else around, were sitting behind a square table covered with a dark red cloth on a small stage in a small hall, where Chairmen of the City Pioneer Companies were seated in rows waiting for their turn to read their account. 
In the rear of the hall the Second Secretary of the City LYCL Committee—responsible for the work with the pioneers—sat in her red pioneer necktie.
The Chairmen in a well-oiled manner followed each other, read from their sheets, left them by the Meeting Secretary, and returned back to the audience.

I also did my part but after the fourth announcement, something suddenly came over me or rather flooded over me. 
My mouth got overflown with saliva, I barely had time to gulp it, and the salivary glands immediately gave out a new portion.
I felt terribly ashamed before the Secretary sitting next to me.
A spell of ease came when she went to account for School 10 but then the shameful torture continued.
What’s wrong with me after all?!
Then came my turn.
Returning from the rostrum, I swallowed three times – it did not help.
OK, let School 14 finish and…
Oh, no! 
The Second  Secretary too with her final word!. 

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my misfortunes or joys sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you accompanied by the incessant flow lapping of the river named Varanda…) 

In October, the seventh-graders started to prepare for joining the ranks of the All-Union Leninist Young Communist League, aka ALYCL, aka Komsomol.
The Komsomol membership was not a cheap giveaway indiscriminately passed out to lined-up squads or companies. 
Not in the least!
You had to prove that you deserved that high honor at a special sitting of the city, or district Committee of LYCL and the Committee Members would ask you questions as in the examination because on entering this youth organization you became an ally to the Party and future communist.

During the training for acceptance, the Senior Pioneer Leader of our school Volodya Gurevitch—a pretty young man with black hair and bluish cheeks because of the thick but always cleanly shaven bristle—distributed to us, the future members, the Charter of Komsomol printed on small accordion-folding leaflets in the smallest typeface. 
He warned that at the Reception Sitting the Committee Members were especially keen on the Charter Section about the rights and duties of the Komsomol members
Volodya Gurevitch graduated from the prestigious School 11 plus the music school as a button-accordion player.
He lived far from the Plant Settlement, in a block of five-story buildings between the Peace Square and the Square of Konotop Divisions which area folks were, for some reason, calling Palestine. 
At school, he wore mixed paraphernalia from a very clean and ironed pioneer necktie and the badge of the Komsomol member on the chest of his jacket – a small red banner with the golden profile of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin's bald head with his wedge-like beard. 
In the close circle of pioneer activists Volodya Gurevitch, because of the coincidence in the patronymic, often said:
‘Call me simply – Illyich.’
His laugh was hearty and loud and after laughing, his lips did not immediately pull together into the neutral position. 

However, Volodya Sherudillo, a sturdily built champion at ‘bitok' battles with the red turf of hair and a thick scattering of freckles over his round face who studied in our class, in the close circle of us, his classmates, called Volodya Gourevitch: 
‘Khannorik of CEC!’

(...at the dawn of the Soviet regime, before enslaving villagers to collective farms, the Communist leadership experimented with organizing rural population into fellowships of Collective Earth Cultivation, hence – 'of CEC!’
However, the meaning of ‘khannorik’ is not defined even in the multi-volume Dictionary of the Russian Language by Vladimir Dahl, probably, because the linguist never visited the village of Podlipnoye.
Who nowadays remembers CECs?
But the villagers’ memory carefully keeps them and transfers from generation to generation.
Though meaning is forgotten the same remains the feeling…)

Konotop City LYCL Committee was located on the second floor in the right wing of the City Council building.
The building itself, somehow resembling the Smolny Institute from the movies about the October Revolution, stood on the other side of the Peace Avenue opposite the Peace Square. 
Three quiet alleys paved with stone blocks led to it bordered with rows of dark thick chestnuts. 
All the guys from our school successfully passed the examination on the ALYCL Charter and were admitted to the Leninist Young Communist League...

In the autumn they started the construction of tramway into the Plant Settlement under the line of giant poplars along the cobbled Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street.
The pillars of concrete rose between the trees to support the contact wire above the tramway.
By the October holidays, the track rails had passed the Bazaar, our school and even turned into the May Day Street, which stretched to the very end of the Settlement. 
Then three small tramcars started to run from the terminal on the city side of the Under-Overpass to the terminal at the end of May Day Street.
Tramcar conductor-women with plum bags hanging under their breasts collected the fare selling three-kopeck tickets which they tore from the rolls on the canvas strap of their bags. 

In the large trams running in the city the driver had only one cab, in the car head, and reaching the terminal stop the trams went around the turning loop to go back.
The tram line in the Settlement had no such loops at its terminals.
The small tramcars had two cabs like the pushmi-pullyu. 
On coming to the loopless terminal the driver swapped the cabs and went ahead.
At the departure from a terminal, the conductor stood on the step of the back door and pulled the canvas strap tied to the tram arc in order to move it backward for easy sliding along the contact wire above the tramway. 
And then again, the doors in the large city trams slammed automatically by the driver in his cab while the small trams had folding doors on hinges: you pulled the middle handle of the door, pushed the folding leaves aside – open; you pulled the end handle of the door, pushed at the middle handle – closed.
But who needed all that trouble?
So the trams in the Plant Settlement ran with their doors always open unless it was a really severe frost.
To give way to the tram coming in the opposite direction two of the stops had the double track – one by our school and the other in the middle of the May Day Street...

The toilet in the Plant Club was on the first floor – at the very end of a very long corridor starting at the library and going between the blind walls under the bulbs in the ceiling.
In the dark green paint on the walls occasionally happened closed doors with signs ‘Children Sector', ‘Variety Band', ‘Dresser Room' and already near the toilet – ‘Gym'. 
All the doors were constantly locked and kept silence only from behind the gym door sometimes came tap-tapping of the ping-pong ball or iron clang of the barbell plates.
But one day I heard a piano playing and knocked on the door of the Children Sector.

From inside, they yelled me to come in and entering I saw a small dark-skinned woman with a bob-cut black hair and wide nostrils who sat at the piano by the wall of large mirror squares.
In the wall opposite the door there were three windows high above the floor and, beneath them, ballet rails ran over a ribbed heating pipe.
In the left half of the room stood a wide screen of the puppet theater in front of which stretched a long narrow table. 
 And then I said that I’d like to enroll the Children Sector.
‘Very well, let's get acquainted – I'm Raissa Grigoryevna, so who and where from are you?' 

She told me that the former actors grew adult or moved away to other cities and for the revival of the Children Sector I needed to bring my schoolmates with me. 

I started canvassing in my class.
Scully and Kuba were doubtful about the idea of joining the Children Sector but changed their minds when I argued that you could easily play ping-pong on that long table.
Two more girls came to see what it was looking like – Larisa Polosmak and Tanya Krasnozhon.
Raissa Grigoryevna was delighted and we began to prepare a puppet performance ‘Kolobok' based on a fairy tale of the same name. 
She taught us to control simple hand puppets so that they did not duck below the screen out of the onlooker's sight. 

We gathered at the Children Sector twice a week but she sometimes missed the rehearsals or was late and for such occasions left the key in the room of the announcement painters.
We opened the Children Sector and played ping-pong for hours, albeit with a tennis ball, across that long table.
Neither had we bats which were replaced with the covers of the school textbooks and the net was made of the lined-up textbooks as well, the ball knocked them down but the repair didn't take long.

Hard is the actor puppeteer's job: both mentally – you need to copy your character's role and learn it by heart, and physically – you shouldn't ever low down your up-stretched arm with the hand doll. 
During the rehearsals, the arm got numb with the fatigue and even supporting it with the other hand didn't really help. 
And the neck also began to ache because the head was constantly tilted upward to check the actions of the doll.

 
But, on the other hand, after the performance, you would step out and come in front of the screen holding your hand with the doll on it by your shoulder and Raissa Grigoryevna would announce that it was you who played the role of Hare.
You nod your head and the Hare near your shoulder bows too and you hear the laughter and applause from the audience… 
O, thorns! O, sweetness of the glory!. 

Later on, many of the participants dropped out but the core of the Children Section—Scully, Kuba, and I—remained. 
Raissa made of us actors for short performances about the heroic kids and adults from the period of the Revolution or the Civil War.
For the performances, we made up, stuck real theatrical mustache, wore army tunics, rolled cigarettes of shag and newspaper slips the way she taught us and let the smoke in and out of our mouths without inhaling it so as not to cough. 
We went then with those performances to the Plant Shops, to the bigger ones where there were Red Corners to hold meetings, and during the midday break acted on tiny stages before the workers while they were eating their midday meal out of newspaper packages.
They really enjoyed the moment with hand-rolled cigarettes...

Twice a year the Club staged a major amateur concert. 
The Club Director, Pavel Mitrofanovich, recited heartfelt poems dedicated to the Party.
The pupils of Anatoly Kuzko from the button-accordion class played their achievements.
The main highlight of the program, though were the dancing numbers by the Ballet Studio because their teacher Nina Alexandrovna enjoyed a well-deserved reputation that attracted students from all over the city.
Besides, the Club possessed a rich wardrobe so that for the Moldavian dance of Jok the dancers appeared in tight pants and vests shimmering with sparkles, and for the Ukrainian Hopak they wore wide trousers and soft ballet boots of red leather.
The accompaniment to all of them including young girls in ballet tutus provided virtuoso accordionist Aidda standing behind the scenes of the stage.
Next to her stood we in army tunics and adult makeup marveling how classy she played without any sheet music. 
The handsome electrician Murashkovsky sang in duet with the bald tenor, a turner from the Mechanical Shop, the Ukrainian ‘Two Colors of Mine’ and recited rhymed comical humoresques.
On the Murashkovsky’s right hand there were only two fingers – the small one and the thumb and to hide the deficit he clamped a handkerchief in them like with a crab claw.
Two elderly women sang romances not in duet but in turn accompanied by the button-accordion of Anatoly Kuzko himself whose eyes were sooner astray than crossed, one of them looked straight into the ceiling when he was talking to you. 

To conclude the concert, Aksyonov, the blonde Head of the Variety Band, and his musicians came to the stage through the dark of the auditorium.
Their drums and double bass were already waiting there in the small makeup room behind the stage, but his saxophone Aksyonov brought himself. 
Blonde Jeanne Parasyuk, also, by the way, a graduate from our school, performed a couple of popular hits accompanied by the Band and the concert ended with applause and shouts of ‘encore!' 

At those concert was filled to the brim as during most popular two-sequel Indian movie.
The stage was illuminated by spotlights along its edge and from above and even by the beams of searchlights from the two balconies.
Along the dark passage, by the wall of the auditorium, the dancers of the Ballet Studio were trotting to change their stage clothes for following numbers at the Dressing Room of auntie Tanya in the long corridor on the first floor.
For our short performances, Raissa taught us how to appear on the stage from behind the scenes and get out without turning your back to the auditorium and how to look into the hall – not at someone in particular but just so, in general, somewhere between the fifth and sixth rows. 
Although in the sharp light of the searchlight directed into your eyes from the darkness of the hall you couldn’t make out anyone after the fourth row and even those in the first one were very blurred.

So the Club became a part of my life and if I didn’t show up home for a long time after school they didn’t worry – I was hanging out at the Club again...

In the winter evenings, the favorite entertainment among guys was riding the ‘sausage' of the tramcar. 
That was such a tubular grille on the springs under the driver cab.
We ambushed the tram at its stop, went from behind, and when the car started rolling ahead, jumped onto the ‘sausage’ clinging with our fingers to the narrow ledge under the glass of the empty driver cabin.
The ledge was quite smooth, nothing to root your fingers into so you had to strain them and change their position often.

The tram rumbles and rolls and bumps on the rail joints waving the springy ‘sausage’ up and down under your feet – class! 
Wow!
The most high-speed stretch of the track was between the Bazaar and our school.
It was there that once my numb fingers began to slip off the smooth ledge but Scully shouted ‘Hold on!' and pressed them back with his palm, but then Kuba cried ‘Kapets!' for his fingers, too, slipped off and he jumped from the ‘sausage' shooting on at full speed. 
It's good he didn't crash against the trunk of some of the poplar giants. 
But he caught up with us from the darkness while the tram car waited at the stop for the counter-coming one and we went on riding together. 

The entertainment was not for us only but for whole groups of guys of our age.
At times there collected so many sausage-riders that the springy grille began to scrape the rails.
At longer stops, the conductor came down from the car to shoo us off. 
We ran aside into surrounding winter darkness but before the tram gained speed we were back on the grille...

Once instead of lessons, our class was taken for an excursion to the KaPeVeRrZe Plant. 
The Plant Fire Brigade was the first to be visited – it’s not far from the Check-Entrance.
Then they took us to the Shop Floor for Filling Oxygen into cylinder tanks.
In the Smithy, no explanations were audible behind the hum of giant fans and howling of the fire in the brick furnaces. 
Workers were pulling glowing ingots from the furnaces with tremendous tongs and transporting them with telpher cranes onto the anvils of hydraulic hammers.

Our class stood for a while watching as a worker turned with his tongs a big incandescent ingot on the anvil, this and that way, under the mighty strikes of huge puffing hammer shooting from above between its oily stands to shape the desired form.
The hammer bangs sent a tremor through the floor around it. 
Big flakes of metal fell off the workpiece and its color darkened and changed to scarlet, then to dark cherry.
But the most surprising was the sensitiveness of the hammer which could also strike very lightly and even stop halfway in the sharp accelerated fall.
It was operated by a woman in a kerchief on her head with just a pair of levers sticking from the juggernaut frame side.

On our way out of the shop past another, silent hydraulic hammer I saw a scattering of round metal tablets the size of a jubilee ruble only much thicker.
I liked their pleasant lilac color, one of them would do for a good bitok to turn kopecks over in the game for money. 
Besides, they were just a waste for sure, thrown there on the floor.
I picked one up and immediately dropped – it badly burned my fingers.
A passing by worker laughed and said:
‘What? A heavy one, eh?’

And in the Mechanical Shop Floor, I was impressed by a planing machine with a narrow low frame scraping off, in no hurry, shavings from the clamped metal plate. 
The astounding thing about the machine tool was its bas-relief boilerplate – manufactured in Riga in 1904.
From before the revolution!
Still working!

Further along, there stood a large Soviet machine tool, also a planer, the cutter ran long runs and the worker sat next to it in a chair just watching. 
Some nice job, huh?

When I shared at home my impressions from the excursion, Mother said I could take shower at some of the Plant's shop floors instead of going to the City Bathhouse at the Square of Konotop Divisions. 
Didn't I know that Vadya Kubarev's mother worked at the Plant cooling tower? 

I discussed that proposal with Scully and he told that he for a long time already had been going to Plant on his bath days and there were shop floors with better shower rooms than that at the cooling tower. 
The majority of the showers worked only to eight but those in the shop floors with three working shifts were open around the clock.
At check entrances, of course, they might not allow us to the Plant but who cared about going through them?
There remained free access through the rear end of the Plant along the tracks for pulling cars in for repair and pulling the repaired ones out.
Actually, there was no need also to go that far because of the high concrete wall along the Professions Street equipped with a number of convenient stiles for the workers to easily take home shabashka from their workplaces. 

(...and again I have to break out from the consequently flowing time and make a jump from Konotop to Varanda, otherwise, how would a metropolitan woman from the third millennium understand the everyday speech of the last century? 

At times even the Dahl’s Dictionary is of little help.
Although he correctly stated that the word ‘shabash’, aka Sabbath, served as a signal for the end of work but no further revelations.
It took the Russian language another hundred years and living up to the era of developed socialism in the country to derivate ‘shabashka’ from the Sabbath.

Shabashka is something produced at work for use at home or just a bundle of board pieces procured at the workplace for burning in the stove at home.
It is a sort of period put at the end of a working day
How do you estimate my etymological efforts?. 

Well, and since I’m here it’s time, perhaps, to crawl into this one-person Chinese pagoda of mine.
What I like about it are its folding bamboo rods. 
Some cleverly designed gizmo – a dozen half-meter tubes assemble into two three-meter elastic poles to stretch the tent on them.
And this mosquito net at the entrance works fine – zip it up and no mosquito flies in.
Buzz outside, bloodsuckers! 
Fig at you!
Now I’ll take off my shirt and pants, get into this sleeping bag ‘made in Germany’, get warm and all the king’s men can’t make you feel cozier.
It’s good when so an ancient civilization of the East and the most technocratic nation of the West work for you.

Although, if you think about it, they are only manufacturers putting to use the ideas which are the global asset accumulated by all.
Any even the most sophisticated widget in this or that advanced nation is the mutual achievement of the mankind as a whole, and even the Amazonia Indians contributed to it by the mere fact of their existence.
Look at the same zipper: who invented it?
I do not know, but hardly it was the Liang Jin dynasty…) 

The scene is a complex mechanism, in addition to its block system to operate the curtains and the electrical board with lots of fuses and switches for controlling its diverse illumination, high above the stage there is a whole cobweb of metal beams for hanging backs, lamps and side wings. 

During the concerts, we not only stood beside virtuoso Aidda and not only chatted with Moldovan-Ukrainian dancers of the Ballet Studio, who were waiting for their turn to appear on the stage, but also explored the mysterious world of the backstage. 
There was a vertical iron ladder to a short catwalk from which you could climb the beams above the stage and cross them to the other side of the stage with the exactly same catwalk but without the ladder, so retrace your Tarzan-walk you, short-sighted Chung.
But what was there – behind that plank partition that stretched above the stage from one wall to the other?
Aha! The attic above the auditorium!

So the plan for the creation of a personal entrance to the film shows had matured – through the attic to the catwalk, from there to the stage, wait until the lights go off, dive under the screen and you were in the auditorium! 

On the first floor of the Club, next to the painters' room there was an unlocked door always ajar to the Plant grounds and we had learned long ago that a solid iron staircase led to the roof of the Club with a dormer allowing an easy access to the attic. 

Kuba, for some reason, did not want to participate leaving it to me and Scully to carry out the plan. 
One dark winter evening, taking the ax from the Scully’s shed, we penetrated the Plant grounds via one of many stiles over the concrete wall.
Without delay or any obstruct we approached the Club building, climbed to the attic and looked around.

It was an extensive space with some iron circle-fencing in the middle.
Lifting its lid we saw the slits in the sheet metal of its round bottom and guessed that it was from where the huge chandelier with garlands of glass hung into the auditorium.
Out of the slits sounded automatic guns bursts and explosions – a movie about the war favored the execution of our not absolutely legitimate intentions.
The electric torchlight showed the cinder layer under our feet sneaking to the place where the attic was crossed by the plank partition. 
We approximately determined the location of the catwalk on the other side of it and proceeded to carefully split the boards in order to break through them.

The boards turned out to be thick and stubborn, besides, we had to stop the work in the lulls between the combat actions below.
Only after cutting through one of the boards we realized the major problem we ran into – the partition was made of two plank layers with a layer of sheet iron between them.
Thus we failed to cut a manhole to get through to the magnificent world of the art of motion pictures.
The builders of yore knew their job, take my word for it…

And pretty soon it turned out that the whole plan had no sense at all because Raissa taught us to take pass-checks from Director of the Club.

About six in the evening Pavel Mitrofanovich, as a rule, was already jolly screwed and when one of the Children Sectorians appeared in his office with a humble petition, he tore off a slip from a sheet of paper on his desk and, snuffling his nose, illegibly wrote on it ‘let in 6 (six) people’ or any other number of people who wished to the show that day.
Below he added an ornate signature running half a line.
When the show began, we went up to the second floor and handed the precious scrap of paper to auntie Shura.
And she unlocked the treasured door to the balconies suspiciously checking if our quantity coincided with the hieroglyphics in the pass-check.

Director of the Club was short and thickset but not pot-bellied.
His slightly swollen, often reddish face had a concordant addition of grayish hair with a natural wave which he combed back.
When the Club workers prepared with the participation of the Plant workers the full-length performance of the play ‘At the Advantageous Place’ by Ostrovsky, Director just parted his hair in the middle of his head, pomaded it and turned out a real Tsar-times Merchant for the play.
The electrician Murashkovsky played the role of Landowner and appeared on stage in a white Circassian coat and in his claw of the disfigured hand, instead of a handkerchief he constantly held a riding whip. 

Even Head of the Children Sector, Eleonora Nikolayevna, partook in the full-length production of the Ostrovsky’s play.

Apparently, the position of Head was higher than that of Artistic Director because Eleonora came to the Children Sector much more rarely than Raissa. 
And she always appeared in long earrings with tiny shining sparklers and in immaculate white blouses with lace collars, and her hands' movements were mannerly retarded, in contrast to the energetic gesticulation of Raissa. 

The only time I saw Eleonora without those hanging earrings was in the one-act play where she was acting the underground communist caught by the White Guards.
The Whites put her into one prison cell with a criminal acted by Raissa and Eleonora converted her into a Communist supporter before they took her away to the execution... 

When Director was not in his office I had no other option but to buy a ticket from the ticket office next to his locked door.
On one of such occasions, I got seated in a row in front of two girls, my classmates – Tanya and Larissa. 
Earlier I had secretly liked Tanya but she seemed to be too unattainable I switched over to courting Larissa.
After the classes, I tried to catch up with her in the Nezhin Street because she also went home that way. 
However, she always was with Tanya, her close girl-friend, and neighbor. 
When Larissa was a participant of Children Sector I once saw her along the Professions Street to the corner of the Gogol Street because she did not allow to see her home.
At that period Tanya also participated in Children Sector and there, actually, were three of us going along the Professions Street.
Tanya kept prodding Larissa to walk faster but then got angry and went ahead alone.

Two of us parted at the corner of the Gogol Street and I went along it to the Nezhin Street enthusiastically recollecting how sweetly laughed Larissa in response to my silly yakety-yak.
On reaching the ice-coated water pump under the lamppost at the corner my enthusiasm evaporated.
Two black figures sharply contrasting against the white snow called me.
I recognized both – one was a guy from the parallel class and the other tenth-grader Kolesnikov from our school. They lived somewhere in the Maruta Street.
In a privately threatening tone, Kolesnikov began to make me understand that if I ever would come up to Larissa again and if he heard or be told that I dared then, well, in general, did I understand what he would do to me?
And he kept repeating those general concepts in a circle with slight variations in the order of priority when I suddenly felt something snatching me at the calf. 
I thought that was a street dog and looked back but there was only a snow drift and nothing else.
At that moment, the meaning of the idiom ‘hamstring shaking with fear’ came to me completely.
He asked again if I understood and I muttered that I understood.
He asked if I understood everything.
I said that, yes, everything.
But I didn't look at their faces and thought how good it would be if Uncle Tolik, the former regional welterweight champion in weightlifting, came to the pump for water… 
No, he did not come. 
In the morning of that day, I had brought enough water to our hutta... 

And now, before the full auditorium, I sat in front of the two girls, my classmates, aware of all the imprudence of such an act, but unable to behave differently.
I turned to them and tried to start a talk in the general hum of the filled hall.
But Larissa was silent and looked aside and only Tanya gave one-syllable answers until Larissa turned to me:
‘Don’t follow me, the guys are sneering at me because of you.’
I did not find anything to answer with, silently I rose to my feet and walked along the blind wall to the exit, carrying the splinters of the broken heart in my chest. 
When I was reaching the last rows my black sadness drowned in complete darkness – the lights went out to start the movies.
To let my eyes get accustomed to the dark I took an empty seat at the row end and stopped suffering because it was "Winnitoo the Chief of Apaches'!. 

 In Number 19 in the Nezhin Street, the old man Duzenko was no more, that part of the hutta was already dwelt by two old women – Duzenko's widow and her sister who moved there from her village. 
And in the half belonging to Ignat Pilluta remained only Pillutikha.
She never stuck her nose from her hutta and the window shutters looking into the Nezhin Street at times did not open for weeks.
She, surely, visited the Bazaar or the Nezhin Store but my paths never overlapped with hers.

In February Grandma Katya was suddenly taken to the hospital.
Perhaps, only for me, with my life filled with school, Club, books, and TV it happened suddenly.
Trying to get everywhere leaves no time to see things around you.

Coming from school I clinked the wicket latch-hook and ran up our porch past Pillutikha’s window in which was seen her profile cloaked with a loose black kerchief and her hand stretched up in the direction of the wall between her and our kitchens.
At home, I threw the folder with school books and notebooks into the crevice between the folding sofa and the cabinet under the TV and went back to the kitchen to have a midday meal with my brother and sister if they hadn't yet had it. 
Mother and Aunt Luda cooked separately for their families and Grandma Katya ate their meal from her younger daughter, together with Irochka and Valerik, at the same kitchen table by the wall between our and Duzenko's parts of the hutta. 

In the daytime the television was showing nothing but the screen with a circle and squares for adjusting the image with small knobs at the back of the TV box, if the circle was uneven then the announcers’ faces would be flattened or too long.
That’s why until five o’clock the TV was turned off and the midday meal was eaten under the muffled drum-roll-like chant behind the wall to the Pillutikha’s which at times turned into indistinct shrieks.
Then I went to the Club and coming back again saw Pillutikha backlit from a distant bulb light in the room.
She never turned the light on in the kitchen where she stood against the wall.

After all the four parents of our hutta returned from work, Pillutikha would add the volume.
Father's comment was:
‘Ew! That Goebbels again at her hurdy-gurdy!’
One time Uncle Tolik put a large teacup to the wall to hear what she was croaking about.
I also pressed my ear to the cup bottom – the chant got nearer and sounded already not behind the wall but in the white cup but remained as thick as before.

Mother advised not to pay attention to the half-witted old woman and Aunt Luda explained that Pillutikha was putting curses on all of us through the wall. 
She turned to that same wall and answered:
‘And all of that back to your bosom!’

I don’t know whether Pillutikha was really crazy.
She managed to live alone after all.
By the end of the war, her daughter left Konotop for the safety sake – not to be twitted for her cheerful behavior with the officers of the German Company Headquarters lodging in their hutta. 
Her son Grisha was doing his ten-year stretch in prison for some murder.
Pilluta died.
No TV in her hutta.
Probably, she kept cursing so as not to go nuts.

The Grandma Katya didn’t say anything about Pillutikha and only smiled a guilty smile.
On some days she moaned occasionally but hardly louder than the muffled Goebbels’s speech behind the wall...

And suddenly the ambulance arrived and she was taken to the hospital.

Three days later they brought Grandma Katya back and put on the leatherette-covered mattress-couch, constructed from the remains of the Object's sofa, in the kitchen under the window, opposite to the brick stove. 
She did not recognize nor spoke to anyone and only moaned loudly.

In the evening our two families gathered in front of the TV and closed the door to the kitchen to cut off her moans and heavy smell.
The Arkhipenkos moved their beds to the room and it became a bedroom for nine.

Next day the ambulance was called again but they did not take her away and only made an injection.
Grandma Katya quieted for a short time but then again began to swerve from side to side on the couch, repeating the same screams;
‘Oh, God! Ah, probby!’
A few years later I guessed that ‘probby’ was from the shortened Ukrainian ‘forgive me, God’.

Grandma Katya was dying for three days.
Our families stayed at neighbors’ huttas.
The Arkhipenkos at Number 15 and we at 21 in the half of Ivan Kreepak. 

Adult neighbors were giving our parents indistinct advice about breaking out the threshold to our hutta or some of the floorboards inside it. 
The most common sense proposal made Ivan Kreepak’s wife, auntie Tamara.
She said that the couch with Grandma Katya stood under the window with a half-open leaf and the fresh air protracted her suffering.

The same evening, Mother and Aunt Luda dropped into our hutta, grabbed more blankets, put out the light and got out onto the porch. 
There Aunt Luda neared the kitchen window and tightly closed the leaf.
Then she stealthily stepped down to Mother and me—I was holding the blankets—with a smile of a naughty girl on her face, or so it seemed in the dark moonless night. 


In the morning Mother woke us sleeping on the floor in the Kreepak’s hutta with the news that Grandma Katya had died.
The funeral was the next day.
I did not want to go, but Mother said I should.
I was burning with shame.
It seemed to me that everyone knew that Grandma Katya was suffocated by their daughters.
So I let the ear-flaps of my rabbit-fur hat loose and pushed it over my eyes.
And so I went all the way from our hutta to the cemetery hanging my guilty head and looking at the feet of those who walked ahead of me.
Though nobody might ever have guessed I did it out of shame because a strong wind was whipping my face with icy pellets. 

At the cemetery when a trumpet shrilly cried over the mound of snow mixed with black earth lumps all Grandma Katya's children were sobbing: Mother, and Aunt Luda and even Uncle Vadya. 

(...living on we irreversible grow harder and harder, someday I’ll turn into an iron cracker from the worn-out scrip of the wanderer searching for her beloved Finist the Radiant Falcon…)


The news of the Yuri Gagarin death struck us though not so tragically as the death of Vladimir Komarov eleven months before him – getting harder we had learned that astronauts were also mortal. 
The TV announcer, keeping his eyes down to the sheet of text on his desk, read that while in a training flight on a jet plane, Gagarin together with his partner-pilot Seryogin crashed when approaching the airfield.
Then he looked up through his black-rimmed glasses and declared the All-Union mourning.

When a person reads from a sheet of paper it does not mean that they hide their eyes because of shame, it's just their job, otherwise how else would we know the news? 

Shortly before Gagarin's death, I heard in the gossip of the adults that he was not so an irreproachable hero, after all; he became self-conceited, and he cheated his wife. 
That scar on his right eyebrow appeared after the jump from his lover’s flat on the second floor.

(...but who’s interested in those rumors today, be they true or not?
For my son Ashot, and for all his generation, Gagarin is just a name from a history textbook, as for me was, say, Marshal Tukhachevsky.
Orbited Earth? Good job. 
Executed by a firing squad? Bad luck. 

Yet for me Gagarin is not a textbook but a part of my own life and, as long as I’m alive, I am interested to find out what happened, how and why.
And digging for the facts it’s difficult not to fall in love with the search engines of the Internet…

Vladimir Komarov knew that he would not return alive from his space flight because his backup, Yuri Gagarin, inspecting the spaceship Voskhod found two hundred technical faults which he listed in a written report of ten pages.
He passed the report through his higher commanders to Leonid Brezhnev, the then leader of the USSR.
The commanders held the report by them, they knew that Brezhnev wouldn’t change the launch date, not to allow the Americans to overtake the Soviet Union in the space flights race.
Komarov could refuse to go to his death, but then the doomed spaceship would be manned with his backup and personal friend, Gagarin. 
In the morning of the launch, Gagarin appeared at the launch pad wearing an astronaut's space suit and demanded that he be sent instead of Komarov but he was not listened to. 

After the burial of Komarov's ashes in the Kremlin wall, next to the ashes of Marshal Malinovsky, Gagarin's behavior towards his superiors became extremely defiant and uncontrolled. 
According to unconfirmed rumors, at one of the government banquets, Gagarin splashed his glass of vodka into Brezhnev's face. 
Americans do not believe in the plausibility of such an incident not because they are stupid but simply because they have different grammar. 
In the Russian language ‘mother’ and ‘death’ are of the same grammatical gender so that for a Russian mujik, consciously or unconsciously, there is something in common between the two.
 Well, how to plausibly translate ‘Death-Mommy’ for Americans if they have got only ‘Mr. Death’?
Not anything fits into my head until I feel it…
As a result, they shove an anti-tank mine under their belt and with the cry ‘Try bearing me back, Mom!' throw themselves under the tank trucks… 

Go and rack your brains over the mystery of the Russian soul.
The solution is in the language...


Gagarin was not expelled from the Cosmonaut Detachment – he belonged to the entire Planet already.
He attended the classes, flew jets in training flights.
Did he know that the countdown for his end had been set to ticking?
I think, he did.
Cosmonauts were selected not only for physical but mental fitness as well.
He did not only know where and when...


On March 27, 1968, Yuri Gagarin was killed in a plane crash near the village of Novosyolovo, Kirzhach District, Vladimir Region.
The morning was foggy, the training flight on a MIG jet was over there remained a couple of minutes to the airfield at the altitude of five hundred meters when from the low clouds the SU jet dropped down, though according to the flights plan for that morning it was supposed to fly at the altitude of fourteen kilometers in a completely different direction. 
Controlled by an experienced test pilot, the huge, in comparison to the training aircraft, SU jet flashed by next to the MIG preparing for landing.
The MIG, captured by turbulence, twirled like a sliver in the breaker, entered a tailspin and collapsed into the forest.
The sound of the explosion reached the airfield.

Let him who has ears hear.

Fadeyev – Khrushchev; Gagarin – Brezhnev.

Let him who understands realize…

But I again got carried away and in the narration about myself there popped up perfect strangers with whom I have never met in my life and only now started to understand that they are also a part of me.
Okay, I stop showing off what a clever guy I am and return to the twentieth century, year sixty-eight, when I am in my fifteenth year and…)

And it is simply outrageous that those Czechs had succumbed to the CIA subversive propaganda and started a counterrevolution in the fraternal camp of the socialist countries.
And they inhumanely blocked the way to our tank with baby carriages and the tank driver turned off in case there were babies inside and died when the tank fell off the bridge. 
So reported the TV news program ‘Time'. 
Then, of course, the Czech Communist Party restored the order in their country with the help of a military contingent from the fraternal states and we started to live on... 

By the way, in those times Konotop surpassed many of the larger cities in the development of television because we had two channels on TV. 
The first was the Central Television, with the news program ‘Time’, and the New Year entertainment program ‘The Tiny Light’, and the Club of Jolly and Resourceful, aka CJR, and the hockey.
Channel Two was the Konotop TV studio that broadcast only in the evening when people were home from work, but it showed movies oftener than on the Central Television. 

Since there were no color TVs around, Father drew a sheet of transparent isinglass over the TV screen. 
The sheet had certain shades in some of its parts – the upper part blue for the sky, the lower one green for the grass.
They say that through that isinglass the announcers' faces looked of more natural color than without it. 
I could not discern such subtleties although never considered myself colorblind.

Such mica became a fashion throughout Konotop and Uncle Tolik brought the sheet for our TV from the Repair Base, aka RepBase, where he worked on a milling machine. 
At the RepBase, they renovated military choppers so had to have a better notion of such isinglass matters. 

The TV channels were changed by clicking the big turn switch under the screen.
However, in the daytime, both the Central Television and the City TV Studio channel showed only the mute tuning circle and when clicking outside those two you had sizzling coarse-grained ‘snow' and jumping streaks of white. 
And (coming back to the available two channels) every day exactly at three, the technicians of Konotop TV Studio switched on music for thirty minutes: ‘Nocturne’ by Tariverdiyev, songs performed by Valery Obodzinsky or Larissa Mondrus – against the background of that same tuning circle.
We—Sasha, Natasha, and I—always switched TV at that time to listen to the music, although the records rarely changed and we knew beforehand which song would follow that or another number.

Besides, Konotop had a wealth of independent underground radio stations that went on air in the mid-wave range. 
There was both ‘The King of the Cemetery’ for you, and ‘Caravel’, and whichever name one would choose to call his station.
Their weak point was their irregularity.
You did not know when to switch the receiver to hear:
‘Hello to all, ‘The Stickman’ radio station is on air. Who hears me, confirm...’
And he put on the hoarsely roaring Vysotsky songs about the Archer who disgraced the Tsar, or how we shoot through space in a spaceship, and about dolphin's belly ripped open by a propeller… 
At some point, the radio station ‘Charming Nina' intervened and began to point out to ‘The Stickman' that he had sat on another guy's wave band and that ‘Charming Nina' had been airing in that particular range for no less than a week. 
And they began to quarrel: 
‘Don't swell too much! Look out, if I catch you at the Peace Square you'll have two blobs instead your ears!' 
‘Hey, you! Mini-willie! Who do you roll a barrel on? Haven’t had wet pants for a whole week?’
‘The more you rant the more you’ll weep!’
‘Close it up!’
But they never switched to four-letter words.
 
Father said even our receiver could be converted into a radio station in a flash if only there was a microphone.
But to all my and Scully’s wheedling to convert it and we’d get a mic somewhere, he refused curtly because it was radio hooliganism and special vehicles were stalking the city to track those hooligans down, and fine them and confiscate all the radio equipment from their hutta, down to the TV box.
We didn't want to lose our TV, didn't we? 

At times those radio-hooligans instead of wished-for Vysotsky songs started endless negotiations about who had which capacitor and which diodes he’d trade it for.
Finally, they agreed to meet at the Peace Square.
‘How do I know you?’
‘Don’t care. I know you. I’ll come up.’
And we fall back to the TV tuning circle, to the hundred times heard but more reliable Obodzinsky. 

The Peace Square in front of the movie theater of the same name was rimmed with long five-story apartment blocks.
The large fountain in its center furnished with a low round wall of granite was turned on once in two years to shoot up a high white jet of water. 
From the wide stone porch steps of the movie theater to the far corners of the square stretched asphalt beams of walks, beautiful chestnut trees lined the walks and the corner-to-corner pavement along the Peace Avenue.
The lawns under the trees had a couple of additionally trampled short-cuts and in the alleys, as well as by the fountain there occasionally stood long benches of paint-coated wooden beams. 

In the warm evening, the square filled up with the ‘whore-promenade’.
Dense waves of loungers leisurely walked the alleys without leaving the square and only circled it time after time watching the faces and clothes of the like counter-flow or of those lucky ones who got seated on the benches.
The alleys asphalt was covered with the soft carpet of husk, which was denser in front of the benches because both the circulating and sitting people ceaselessly chewed black seeds spitting out the inedible husk.

Sometimes I also went along with the lounging stream towards the tram stop after the end of a movie show.
It happened not so often though because from one sequel of ‘Fantômas’ to another you had to wait at least six months.

In the afternoon, the benches were mostly empty, though one time I and Kuba were called from one of them by a pair of young grown-up idlers who demanded kopecks from us.
Kuba began to assure that we had no money with us, but I suggested; 
‘Take all that falls out!’
With those words, I pulled out the left pocket in my pants and dusted the pocket bag hanging inside-out with my hand. 
I did not bother with the right pocket though because there were ten kopecks for a tram.
The guy looked around and promised to beat me up, but he didn’t rise from the bench.
We went on and Kuba upbraided me for stupid impudence which could too easily end in having my silly mug punched which I deserved.
Probably, he was right and I just didn’t envision such an outcome, carried away with the idea of making a fine gesture – to pull out an empty pocket.
What saved me?
The rogue might have decided that I was under the protection of some guy with a pull among the thieves, otherwise, why would I be so recklessly insolent? 

‘Enters Sehrguey Ogoltsoff from Konotop!’ announced Raissa when Scully and I entered the Children Sector room.
Seeing that I couldn't catch up with the humor, she handed me The Pioneer magazine opened at the page with a story, under which it stood in a black bold typeface: ‘Sehrguey Ogoltsoff, the city of Konotop'. 

I had already forgotten how, last fall, I sent two notebook pages about my conversation with a dwarf to the fantasy story contest announced by the magazine.
There we discussed some trifles while I was dozing off.
And suddenly – here you are!
How sweetly smelt the pages of typography print in the fresh magazine issue! 

My legs kind of weakened and I felt a soft blow to the back of my head but somehow from the inside.
I sat down in one of the triple-complected auditorium seats put along the ballet rail under the window and read the publication in which there was almost nothing left of what I had sent to the contest.
And the dwarf spoke of certain filmmaker Ptushko I had never heard of.
However, neither in Children Sector nor at home had I ever shared with anyone that most of the story was not written by me – after all, not every day your story is printed in a thick monthly magazine.

When the summer came Mother grew fat and Father started somewhat guiltily asking us—their children—what about having one more brother?
We could call the babe Alyoshka, huh?
Natasha wrinkled her nose, Sasha stayed silent as well and I shrugged and said; 
‘What for?’
The addition to the family seemed to be awkward not because of deterioration of living conditions but of the too big age difference between the parents and the prospective baby.

Father dropped the subject and never picked it up again.
A couple of weeks later I accidentally heard Mother talking to Aunt Luda:
‘I used the pill and then they brought the barrels of beer to the stall, I rolled them in and – that’s it.’
So there was no change in numbers of our generation of Konotop Ogotsoffs, and Mother remained fat forever. 

Her stall stood in the central alley of the Central Park opposite the Peace Square.
It looked like a round hut under a tin roof.
The sheet-metal door on behind had a heavy padlock and the trade was conducted through a window with a square ledge-counter above the asphalt of the path under the trees.
Besides the draft beer in dark wooden barrels to which, in turn, was inserted a hose with a fastening to run the beer up to the faucet by the window, the goods included also packaged cookies, two-three sorts of cheap candies, packs of cigarettes, lemonade in bottles, wire boxes with bottled fruit-and-berry ‘White Strong’ wine, the Georgian ‘Rkatseteli’, and a wine of unknown origin named ‘Riesling’ which was so awfully hard to sell out.

‘White Strong' was selling like hotcakes because of its price – one ruble and two kopecks for a half-a-liter bottle. 
Cigarettes also did not linger for long but the main engine of the trade remained beer.
When there was a delivery delay and they did not bring beer barrels from the Trade Base of Workers Provision Department, aka ORS, Mother began to sigh that the monthly plan for her stall would not be done with the consequent cuts to her salary. 

My life rolled on along its tracks and those tracks somehow bypassed the City Central Park although my sister and brother occasionally boasted of dropping to Mother's workplace for free lemonade. 
Yet, one time I spent in the stall almost a whole day because of the secret service agent Alexander Belov.

In those abysmally old times, it was impossible to subscribe to ‘The Novel-Gazette' monthly. 
The magazine justified its name, it was printed on inexpensive newsprint and in two columns per page but its thickness was on a par with the ‘Pioneer’ or ‘The Youth’ monthlies.
Albeit absent from the subscription lists at the post offices, ‘The Novel-Gazette’ could still be found at libraries or by some lucky person who had borrowed it from the previous lucky beggar.
If a novel was too long for one issue it was to be continued in the following month.
Well, at times, deviating from the magazine title, they printed collections of stories or (quite rarely) poems, but no more than a couple of authors per issue.

So, getting the word of mouth that in ‘The Novel-Gazette' they had published ‘The Shield and Sword' by Vadim Kozhevnikov I hurried to the Club Library and was told that all the three issues were already lent out and they had put together the queue-list of those wishing to borrow the masterpiece. 

When Mother told that one of her colleagues gave her ‘The Shield and Sword’ for a couple of days, the rails of my accustomed life tracks at once swung around towards her stall where I arrived the next day soon after the opening.

First chapters I read in the stall sitting on a wire box with empty bottles, then I got smart enough to move over to a nearby bench returning only to exchange the issues or sit in Mother's place while she went to the park toilet, and even sold something. 
By the end of the day, I lived through the career of the Soviet intelligence officer Belov, aka Johann Weiss, from a private of the German Wehrmacht to an officer at the Abwehr intelligence service. 

The trade during that day was rather sluggish because the stall had run out of beer and the empty barrels piled up outside by the back door.
However, with the onset of twilight when I moved back to the stall to finish reading of the last issue under a dim bulb hanging from the ceiling, at the very end of the Second World War, the flow of buyers began to increase.
That’s it...
And I stacked all the three magazine issues on a box near the door.

The trickle of customers turned into a line thickly crowding before the outside counter.
The growth of hands held up rose over it with crumpled rubles and handfuls of kopecks. 
Mother said:
‘Wait a little. I close in half an hour. We’ll go home together.’
I sat leaning my back against the door so as not to be in the way for her taking goods from here and there. 
Half an hour later the flurry by the stall in the park alley did not subside.
‘Maman! A pair of the Strong Blondes and a small one of cookies!’
‘Auntie! Auntie! A pack of ‘Prima’!’
‘Sister! A bottle of white!’
‘White is over.’
‘And over there? In that box?' 
‘It's Rkatsiteli – a ruble and thirty-seven.' 
‘Alright, come on! Let it be it, we’re not racists!’

Finally, the Georgian was over too, the crowd dissolved.
Mother dropped the window shutter but had to open again for a latecomer trotting up along the dark alley.
From grief that everything's sold out he bought a bottle of expensive incomprehensible Riesling for a ruble seventy-eight, though it already was thirty minutes past the allowed hours for selling alcohol. 
When Mother locked the stall and we walked to the tram stop at the Peace Square I asked if such a mayhem was there every evening.
‘No, Seryozha. It’s because of it's Sunday today.'

And in the summer the Kandeebynno awaited us again, but now, apart from swimming trunks and a sandwich with melted cheese we had to not forget a deck of cards.
‘Whose move?’
‘Yours.’
‘No cheating?’
‘Take your eyes off your shoes! It's Scully who's been dealing!' 
‘Labor made Ape into Man... Here, two Knaves to Kuba.’
‘Labor made Man into Cart-Horse... Queen and Ace of the suit.’

On each beach blanket spread between the currant bushes heated battles of ‘throw-in fool' went on to the music from portable radios. 

The most enviable one, of course, was Spidola, the make of Riga Radio plant, the size of a notebook and no thicker than a brick. 
The telescopic antenna was hidden in its plastic case leaving just button-like top outside. 
Pulling that button you obtained the nickel-plated fishing rod for catching short waves.
The long and medium waves were received without extending the antenna.

Catching radio stations on short waves was a hopeless occupation though.
Half of the range was drowning in sizzling, hissing, and crackling because of ours were deafening all those ‘voices’ in the service of the CIA:
‘The Voice of America’, ‘Liberty’, ‘Russian Service of BBC’
So on the beach, everybody listened to the ‘Mayak' – the All-Union Radio Station, which broadcast signals of the exact time and short news account every half hour and the rest of the air was filled with concerts at the requests of radio listeners. 

But it's better not to go to the Kandeebynno alone and not only because you'd stay without partners for card-playing but merely for security reasons. 

Once, not paying attention to the warnings from Kuba and Scully, I swam across the Kandeebynno to the low dam of fish lakes. 
A group of guys of my age was there on the bank.
One of them asked me in Ukrainian:
‘Have you seen Peka?’
‘Who’s Peka?’ asked I in reply and got a sucker punch into the chin.
They all dived from the bank and swam away.
It did not really hurt, but distressed.
Probably, the blades from Zagrebellya.
And what, if one were allowed to ask, did I do to them?

(… in those irrevocably far away times—past any reach, redress, recall—I hadn't realized yet that all my misfortunes or joys sprang from that bastard in the unfathomably distant future who now is composing this letter to you lying in a tent in the middle of a dark forest under the incessant flow lapping of the river named Varanda…)

The Kandeebynno was not the only place for beach going in Konotop.
Let’s take, for instance, the gully filled with water in the middle of the field beyond the Settlement.
Sometimes its grassy banks were overcrowded, even the guys from the City came there.
And the three of us a couple of times went by our bicycles to the river of Yezooch in the diagonally opposite outskirts of Konotop. 

The flow was almost none – unnoticeable as if the river fell asleep under thick willows along the grassy banks. 
And it was deep indeed, there even stood a tower for high diving made of iron pipes.
It had three levels – one, three and five meters high. 
We climbed the ladder to the three-meter level but it took some time to pluck the heart for a dive.
And even then it was not a headlong dive but a heel-first jump. 
Then we proceeded onto the five-meter platform but having looked at the water too far down retract lower in silence.
Even Kuba.

Leaving already, we saw an adult in a nice ‘swallow-like’ dive from the highest level.
The only drawback of Yezooch was its lack of beach-goers.
There was no one except for us and the lonely diver.

And the most popular place for summer recreation of Konotopers was, of course, the sandy beach of the Bay on the Seim river – just two stops from the Station by a suburban train.
But that summer I didn't go there. 
Not because the ticket cost twenty kopecks, you could go there as a hidden traveler, aka ‘hare'. 
The crowd of Seim-goers was so thick that the conductors couldn’t squeeze through all the cars in ten minutes.
And not because every summer the river of Seim reaped a grim harvest of two or three drownings – young guys, who were then buried with a crowded funeral.
I was not afraid of that because nothing of the kind could ever happen to me. 
The reason was that everybody went to the Seim on weekends – the days when Uncle Tolik and I were fishing.
Although a couple of times we dropped over to the Bay Beach—just so along the way, with the fishing rods hitched to the ‘Jawa’ trunk.

Once we even had an overnight stay one kilometer away from the Beach.
That was when Uncle Tolik’s brother, Vitya, came from the regional center, the city of Sumy to propose to Natasha from Number 15 in the Nezhin Street where the Arkhipenkos stayed while Grandma Katya was dying.
Vitya was not balding like his elder brother — Uncle Tolik when proposing to Aunt Luda.
No, Vitya's hair was all in place – light brown, combed straight back as in the style of young blades at the end of the fifties'. 
He was already over thirty, but then auntie Natasha from Number 15 was not a young girl either.
On the other hand, the whole hutta and the garden at Number 15 belonged to her and her two parents. 

That Saturday Uncle Tolik and I also came with the fishing rods to stay overnight on the Seim bank and the next day to go fishing. 
But auntie Natasha’s father hadn’t brought yet the partakers in the away-night to the appointed place by his ‘Moscvitch’ car.
To pass the time, Uncle Tolik and I went to the pioneer camp in a pine forest, about half a kilometer from the Bay. 
And while Uncle Tolik rode away somewhere else – ‘there, not too far off’, I watched a movie in the open-air camp cinema.
'A Million Years B.C.' was a classy film about Tumak banished by his black-haired tribe and a tribe of blondes accepted him because he had piled a dinosaur and save a small blonde child. 
When the movie ended Uncle Tolik came back from his ‘not too far off’ and warned me to tell, when asked, that we were watching the movie together.

We returned to the appointed place where auntie Natasha’s father had already brought her, and Aunt Luda with Irochka, and auntie Natasha’s groom Vitya with his and Uncle Tolik’s third brother.
They had already set up a tent, behind which loomed the car of ‘Moscvich’, and built a small fire in front of the tent.

I went down to the sandspit under the steep riverbank and touched the flowing water.
It was so warm that I couldn’t resist and went into the river.
I did not dive, or swim and only wandered, hither and thither, along the smooth sandy bottom by the bank.
Then Vitya and his bride came down too.
He wanted to swim, despite her persuasions not to, and I returned to the fire to dry up and it was already dark around.
Then I crawled to the edge of the high bank over the river and looked down.
Against the background of the stars glinting in the river flow, two silhouettes kissed each other – so romantic. 
Perhaps, my head also was seen from below against the starry sky because Vitya cried out ‘bitch!’ and flung his arm.
Invisible in the dark pebble hit me on the forehead.
I shouted ‘Missed!’ and rolled away from the edge.
Of course, I lied if it had missed it would not hurt so much.

When the romantic pair came back to the fire, Vitya asked me:
‘Do you know what ‘fingertips’ are?’
I said I did not and he told me to stand up and, when I did, he put his fist to my chin and threw me to the ground with the sharp push of his fist.
‘That’s what the ‘fingertips’ are’, said he.
Lying next to the fire I said:
‘Vitya, my friend Kuba is in the habit of saying “Doctor doesn’t take offense at the sick”’.
But I felt hurt all the same.

The women and the small Irochka slept in the car and all the rest inside the tent.
In the morning Uncle Tolik and I went to another place to fish but the catch was quite useless – not enough to feed a cat.
I didn't see Vitya anymore because his wedding with auntie Natasha took place in the city of Sumy and they stayed to live there... 

In the middle of the summer, in the middle of a week, and even in the middle of the working day Uncle Tolik unexpectedly came home from work. 
‘Fetch the fishing rods, quick!’ shouted he from the doorway.
While hitching them to the ‘Jawa’ trunk he announced that the dam of the Kandeebynno fish breeding lakes had broken through and all the fish fled to the Yezooch river.
We rode across all of the city, crossed the bridge to Zagrebellya and Uncle Tolik, slowing down, drove along the bank of Yezooch in search of a free place for fishing.

There was almost no place left.
Along both banks of Yezooch men and boys with fishing rods and poles were standing in continuous rows throwing hooks, pulling them out with or without flashing prey. 
It was a spontaneous day off.
It was the demonstration of Konotop fishing forces.

(...up to now I am not absolutely sure: was the breakthrough of the fish breeding lakes somehow connected with the Crazy Summer '68 in France, or was the then revolutionary situation there a result of the Kandeebynno events?
Though both might, probably, have been related to some other but undoubtedly mutual cause…)

A few days later Scully and I went to the Kandeebynno on foot.
The fish lakes stretched like a vast field covered with the dingy crust of half-dry mud. 
Occasional green algae spots were still seen here and there.
In one of such spots, there was a shallow but long pit full of live fish. 

We were picking them out with bare hands.
Not very large fish though, about twenty centimeters.

Scully had a mesh-bag with him but I had to take off my tank top and tied it with a knot from below so that I could carry the catch.
At home they fried the fish, it was enough for both families and even Zhulka had his share.
Aunt Luda teased Uncle Tolik that he had never brought such a catch from his fishing.

Summer’s the time of repair and reconstruction.
Father cut a hole in the dead wall of the kerogas section of the veranda and inserted a small frame with a glazed leaf on hinges. 
The daylight came to the section and made it more comfortable and no need to switch on the bulb every entering time.

Then came the kitchen's turn.
One Sunday everything was taken out of it into the yard except for the too heavy refrigerator by the door.
On the same day, Mother and Aunt Luda whitewashed all the walls, ceiling and the brick stove.
They worked until finished and it was too late for bringing things in, they just washed the floor in the kitchen and everybody had to spent the night in our room. 

Natasha yielded her folding bed to Irocnka and Valerik, and she returned to her old place at the end of the couch shared by Sasha and me.
The middle of the room was occupied by the thick mattress from the bed of the Arkhipenkos parents and there remained no place – you had to watch where to step.
Sasha and I were already in bed, with our legs bent up, as Aunt Luda decided to take a dip in the kitchen while everyone else was watching TV. 
She brought from the yard the mirror in the rectangular wooden frame and hang it on its nail above the fridge.
Then she poured hot water into a big tin basin for washing and pulled together the striped curtains in the doorway between the kitchen and the room. 

The light in the room was switched off in order to better see the TV screen and the volume decreased but I, all the same, muttered that I could not sleep with the sound on. 
And I got the usual answer:
‘Who makes you listen? Pull the blanket over your head and sleep.' 
Aunt Luda was splashing in the kitchen, then the called Uncle Tolik to rub her back.


When he returned and sat on the folding-bed with his children, I noticed that there remained a narrow gap between the curtains through which you could see the mirror over the refrigerator reflecting the floorboards, the edge of the tin basin and the back of Aunt Luda sitting in it. 
And then I did what I was told to do and pulled the blanket over my head.
But I did not intend to sleep.
I placed the blanket on the wooden armrest of the couch and wrinkled it up into a ripple to watch into the distant mirror on the opposite wall of the kitchen.
There, practically, was nothing to watch – wet floorboards with splotches of soap foam, a slightly moving shoulder under the long wet black hair.
Then there remained only the floor and the edge of the tin basin because Aunt Luda got out of it.

But then she appeared again in the mirror and much closer too because she came up to it from below with a towel around her waist and naked breasts.
She smiled a little smile, licked her lips and looked straight into my eyes through my blanket periscope. 
I firmly shut my eyes and didn’t open them anymore while she was wiping the floor in the kitchen and coming over to the room.
Then everybody got to their beds, the light and TV turned off.
Only then I, at last, removed the blanket from over my head. 
The room was pitch dark. 

A little later various snuffling from all the sides mixed with the darkness and then from below, where the Arkhipenkos mattress had been put, came a low slowly rhythmic scraping as if a bale of straw was being clutched and released on the floor. 
I did not turn my head.
First, what the use in such a darkness?
And then, with the tons of books read before I knew without looking, they were cautiously making love.

Six months later, on a dark winter evening when I and Scully went to take a shower in the Plant he called me to watch through the windows of the female section in the Plant Bath lit from inside.
I did not approach.
Was I shy to do it in his presence?
I don’t know.
But even when I went to a shower alone I did not watch through those windows... 

And that same summer Raissa asked us to recollect the old good days and tour the city kindergartens with a puppet show.
In less than a week we gave ten performances.
In the morning we came to a kindergarten indicated by her the day before, installed in their dining room the screen brought by a Plant truck, hung a backdrop, set up tripods with the hut and a forest tree, performed the show before the much-respected tot public and moved to the next kindergarten; the scenery on the truck and the actors by tram. 

Kuba grumbled that we were got to a conveyor belt for a ‘thank you’ and who knows how much Raissa ripped off the kindergartens’ directors in eye-to-eye talks in their offices, but I did not care.
Raissa every day treated us with ice cream of the most expensive Plombir flavor and besides she once took everybody to a movie show in the Vorontsov Movie Theater and it was not her fault that ‘The Western Corridor' turned out to be such an eerie splatter film. 
Besides, and most importantly, the money we earned that week wouldn’t amount to the price of watching films in the Club with the check-passes from Director that we were doing for years after her lead...

The Club alone was not enough to satisfy my inclinations.
The temple of Melpomene in the Children Sector providing check-passes for the film going was a nice pastime but I had been always attracted by architecture. 
The only available grounds to practice it was the yard of our hutta.

Our parents allowed erecting an experimental structure there propped by the fence of the Turkovs from Number 17 under the condition that it would in no way block the easy access to the sections of the long shed in the yard, thus leaving no space for the complaints from the hutta dwellers. 

To get the construction materials I, with my brother and Scully, went to the Grove where wandering among the quagmire bogs of the Swamp, we cut two bundles of two-meter-long whips and brought them on a bicycle, plus a thick bunch of thinner branches with green foliage. 

Some of the whips became the lattice roof fastened with pieces of wire and all sorts of strings.
The roof lay on the fence with one edge and its opposite side was supported by the latticed wall from the rest of the whips.
Thus we got a nice cage in the crisscross style.
Then we covered the roof and two walls with the leafy branches. 
Wow!

Inside, the structure had a pleasant odor of fading leaves, and outside it pleased the eye by its presence in the corner of the yard.
A week later the foliage wilted but the delight and ecstasy with the creative efforts sagged even earlier. 
The question arose, the eternal question nagging any creator: what next?
You would not organize a clandestine pioneer group like that in ‘The Timur’s Team’ just because there was a suitable structure for its headquarters in your yard, would you?
Especially when you were past the age for such games.

So Scully and I switched over to our usual pastime – unsuccessful hurling of a kitchen knife into the old Maple tree trunk next to the ancient stack of crumbling bricks because that year the first Soviet Western ‘The Uncatchable Avengers’ at long last reached the Konotop cinemas and on the silver screen the Gypsy's knife hurled with a swish and stuck in the thin trunk of a white birch. 
In reality, though, even when striking with its blade point, the home-made knife would just bounce from the stone hard bark of the target...

The leaves of the structure withered, blackened and fell off but the cage-like skeleton withstood another couple of years. 

My itch for architecture still did not subside but the next creation I built alone.
The huts over the Duzenko’s and our earth-pit cellars stood each on its own with a gap of half a meter in between.
The gap was boarded up from the yard but coming from behind the huts, along with the neighbor's fence, you reached a narrow nook which it was possible to squeeze into. 

There I built my private study room.
A piece of plywood fixed in horizontal position to the boarding from the yard served a desk.
A length of plank nailed between the walls of the blind passage became a stool.
The design was more than Spartan but then no one would claim access to the study, neither my brother and sister nor the little Arkhipenkos. 
Well, let’s say they’d sneak in when I was not home, and then – what?

When the construction of the office was over, there again arose the doggone question: and what next? 
It’s good I had a place for unobserved secluded speculations where no one could see me except, perhaps, for Zhulka on the other side of clumsy boarding who clearly was not happy with my popping up in the unvexed quarters of the yard.
With an unhidden displeasure, he dragged behind him his iron chain over to his kennel.

And still, what for could be used that nook of solitude?
That's when I gave way to my penchant for graphomania.

I have no idea how to determine it in scientific cant—expressed or manifest—but I always felt a craving for new notebooks, albums, block-notes and the like items from the paper industry.
It's a thrill to spread them wide open and start to cover with the jerking lines of my clumsy handwriting their untouched purity… 
The only drag is finding content for those same lines...

It’s not an obstacle though for a beginner graphomaniac.
I just took a book about adventures of a group of circus actors in the turbulent years of the Civil War, then I found a thick notebook, not finished during the school academic year, and retired with them to my study, so to say, room...

(...a strange scientific fact: when it came to doing my written homework assignments, my graphomania got lost untraceably...) 

I opened the book and the notebook and started to copy the content of the first onto the ruled pages of the latter. 
I did not bother to ask myself about the purpose of that occupation.
What the hell!
I liked the process itself.

The process reached the middle of the second chapter when a spell of bad weather made my study too damp and chilly and the adventure story remained un-handmade-copied. 

In good weather, I had a private reading room, not of my own creation. 
The gardens unfolding behind the sectioned shed and earth-pit cellar huts were divided into plots by a net of narrow paths leaving the beds in between for garden and kitchen crops.
The beds did not merge into integral stretches of each owner because various historical processes led to the land swap and using it as means of paying for services or goods between the neighbors. 
As a result, the land possessions turned into a complicated patchwork strip. 
For instance, our tomato bed was located right behind the shed and followed by Duzenko’s kitchen garden separating our cucumber-sunflower plot and the booth of our outhouse next to the drain pit.
And potatoes we planted at the very end of the garden, past Pilluta’s stretch, under an old sprawling apple tree.
After our potatoes bed, there began, or rather ended, the plot belonging to the hutta in the Kotsubinsky Street, which ran parallel to the Nezhin Street.

So the vegetable and fruit gardens embraced by the huttas of three adjacent streets and one lane composed a vast area covered with beds and fruit trees of different sorts. 

The apple tree on whose mighty, wide sprawling branches I lounged in hot summer days, with a book, under the blue dome of the sky with massive mops of immovably hanging white clouds, was called Antonovka apple. 
The length of some of its branches allowed for laying upon them swaying slightly until a barely felt breeze would run up from the hot expanses.
When my sides started to ache from so too hard a hammock I'd climb down and go on a stealthy visit to the raspberry plot somewhere between Number 15 and 13. 
In the gardens, you occasionally came across a short stretch of a fence that served a dividing landmark between the possessions but not a barrier to a silent raid. 

That was where I read ‘The Star Diaries of Jon Calm' and ‘The Return From an Interstellar Mission' by Stanislaw Lem, ‘Khoja Nasreddin' by Vladimir Solovyov, ‘The Odyssey of Captain Blood' by Rafael Sabatini, among other works for the unsystematic reading by the younger generations. 
But then, for no obvious reason, I suddenly decided to meet the requirements of the school curriculum and started to learn by heart the poem ‘Eugene Onegin' by Pushkin though at school they, in fact, wouldn't ask to recite more than one stanza from it. 
The respect to the school curriculum served just an empty excuse: after solidifying the first stanza I went on to the next one and so, day after day, I murmured to the Antonovka apple tree about the always alert Breguet watch, and scrupulous London, and the lack of a pair of slender female legs in the whole Russia…

After more than twenty stanzas I began to lose myself in reciting of the initial ones, but then Mother helped me out.
Returning from the Sunday visit to the Bazaar she said of meeting there Lyudmila Konstantinovna, a teacher of the Russian Language and Literature from our school, who asked if I would like to go to Leningrad with an excursion of schoolchildren at an inexpensive price. 
You bet I would!
But where could I get the money from? 
Mother paid the price and gave me an incredible sum of ten rubles for the journey. 
Departing, I made a firm decision to buy a small billiards with that money, like the one we were playing at Children Section.

(..but now, not as a consistent narrator, but as a layman archaeologist wrapped in my sleeping bag in this tent to the accompaniment of the eerie symphony of the nightlife in this dark forest – would I be able to unearth the root reason for the self-straining memorization of the Pushkin's poem? 
It seems, that only now and just from here I would.

To begin with, the scheme ‘I decided and started to...’ does not apply to me.
The scheme itself is quite Okay.
It's a good, useful and flawlessly logical one, but my way of doing things is right the opposite. 
I act first and then start looking for a decision that would justify and make my action reasonable.
That is, I’m motivated not with some deliberate decisions but by some other reasons.
Then what or who, the hell, is prodding me to act?!
What are the secret springs and goads?
The answer is: my trustful and all too ready submission to the impact of the printed word. 
The stuff I read programs my subsequent actions.

When Alexander Belov, a Soviet secret agent, forced the fascist intelligence officer Dietrich to flip, before his eyes, through a folder with top-confidential documentation, and later, in a safe house, dictated to his helper-asset dozens of addresses, names, and figures from his memory, that made me start to memorize the rhymed lines by Alexander Pushkin. 
Pretending that it was a check if I could do it too is just a meaningless excuse, the root reason lays in just the fact of my reading ‘The Novel-Gazette’ with the work by Kozhevnikov which, frankly, does not deserve the name of a novel.

Or take another case, when, impressed by the book ‘The Baron in the Tree', about an aristocrat who refused to walk upon the ground anymore and moved to live in the trees, I mounted the stack of bricks under the unembraceable American Maple tree and from there climbed the less impregnable part of the trunk. 
I was climbing higher and higher, to the very clouds.
That day they floated quite low, almost brushing the top of the tree.
Viewed from the upper branches, distant huttas under the tree decreased to the size of matchboxes.
I looked down at the Bazaar, and at the Plant, no more hidden behind the high wall along the Professions Street, and at the Station on the other side of the Plant! 
The magic power of printed word by Italo Calvino made me obedient like melted wax, turned into a docile slave and landed on top of the American Maple tree...

Of course, the secret springs slip at times – how could I possibly compete with D’Artagnan and ride twenty leagues in one day running down three horses which I did not have?
Keep your legs to the length of the blanket, they say.
That’ why I like this sleeping bag so much – it fits any leg size...)

Our way to Leningrad ran through Moscow.
To the excursion, besides me and Lyudmila Konstantinovna, went two more girls from my class — Tanya and Larissa, and from the parallel, 7‘A’ class, Vera Litvinova, and Tolik Sudak; the rest of the participants were students from other city schools with two teachers of theirs.

The train arrived in Moscow in the morning and we spent there the whole day which brought me to three discoveries.

First was the discovery of the foreshadowing dreams existence. 
It was during our tour in an excursion bus around the city—look to the left! look to the right!—and in some place, we were asked to leave the bus and look at something from a near. 
Our group paced listening to the guide but I fell behind.
And then all of a sudden I seemed to be so familiar with that bridge above no river, and the distant high building of the Moscow State University and even that locked stall on the pavement. 
Someone from our group turned back and cried to me:
‘Don’t lag behind or we’ll leave without you!’
And I answered:
‘When you turn back, I’ll be the first!’
And at that moment I suddenly remembered that I had already seen that view in the smallest detail and spoke those words already in a dream that I dreamed a week ago. 
I was so amazed, that even stopped, but not for long – the excursion group was indeed returning to the bus.

(…in later life I occasionally had such influxes of falling into once-seen dreams.
Sometimes the recollection went preceding for a fraction of second the actual development of the events.
I knew who and what would say a second later and what gesture would they make because all the happening was just an echo of the scene I had already seen in a dream. 
Duration of such moments is not too long and the dream sometimes is separated from its echo by many years.
I did not share my discovery with anyone and much later, with a mixture of relief and disappointment, I learned that such things happen not only to me and that the Scots even have a special term for the phenomenon – ‘second sight’…)

For the second revelation, we went to the All-Union Exhibition of Achievements of the National Economy, aka Veh-Deh-eN-Kha. 
There we were taken to the Astronautics Pavilion, in front of which stood the white arrow of a ‘Vostok’ type spaceship, on which Gagarin orbited the Earth.
Several excursions at once wandered in the spacious pavilion between the stands and mock-ups, and mannequins in red space suits and white helmets. 
I did not know what the other guides were telling, but ours repeated things that anyone already knew so I kept lagging behind or running ahead and at some point turned in a wide side door.

Stone steps led upward and above them hung the inscription ‘Optics Pavilion’.
I ascended to the landing from which the steps turned to the pavilion itself.
But I didn’t go further.
I was fascinated by the extravaganza of color and airiness unfolding on the landing.

A cubic meter of space was filled with a motionless, as if frozen, family of soap bubbles radiating all hues of the rainbow colors. 
Delight, delight!

Someone from the Konotop excursion had noticed how I turned into that door.
I was called from below:
‘Come on we are leaving!’
I looked up at the glass door which I was not destined to enter and returned to ours. 

(...what was behind that door I do not know and the discovery is as follows: sometimes a single step away from the trodden rut opens new shining worlds, but a step aside is an escape attempt…) 

The final, third, discovery was lurking in the State Universal Shop, aka GUM, on the Red Square, where we arrived without any guide.
There I learned that dreams do come true, you just need to be ready for their fulfillment.

At the entrance to GUM, we were told to gather in the same place in half an hour and were dismissed into a free search. 
From the inside, GUM looked like a giant ocean liner: empty space in the middle, with multi-story transitions along its sides. 
In one of the compartments on the third floor, they were selling the billiards of my dream. 
And the price was exactly ten rubles.

How I was cursing my gluttony!
With the money given by Mother, I had already paid for two ice cream: one in the morning at the station and another at the Veh-Deh-eN-KHa. 
I had to say goodbye to my dream. 
To mitigate the grief, I ate one more ice cream right in the GUM.

In the evening tired but happy (if not to recollect the misfire with billiards) we left Moscow for Leningrad...

In the city on the Neva river, we were put on a camp at some school on the Vasilevsky Island, not far from the Zoo. 
We were allotted half of the school gym since the other half was occupied already by an excursion group from Poltava city. 

We did not constrain them—the gym was very spacious—only moved a number of black sports mats they were not using into another corner.
In addition to the mats, we were given cloth blankets and could sleep with more comfort than the royal court of France when they flew from the rioting Paris in ‘Twenty Years Later' by Alexandre Dumas. 

For three meals a day we went up a couple of blocks to a canteen over a humpbacked bridge above the Moika river. 
A very quiet place, with hardly any traffic.
There our elders paid with paper coupons, the girls arranged the food on the square tables and invited the others to come in from the street.

Sometimes we had to wait because apart from the Poltava’s and ours there also were other excursion groups – not from our gym though.
Then we stood on the bridge over the narrow river with its unobservable flow between the stone-walled banks. 

‘On the Moika bank
we ate garbage skank’

So ran the epigram composed by someone from our group.

(...the rhyme, of course, is flawless, but I personally had no complaints about the food there – everything was as it always was in any canteen I dropped in along my life path…) 

We were a little late for the white nights but everything else was in place – both the Nevsky Avenue, and the Palace Bridge, and trotting through the halls of the Hermitage with immense Pompei demolition by Karl Bryullov, and oily luxurious paintings by Dutch masters...

In the St. Isaac Cathedral they launched for us the Foucault’s Pendulum hanging from the main dome.
It swung for some time swishing between the high icon decorated walls and then pegged down one of the high wooden pins lined on the polished floor.
‘See?!' exclaimed the Cathedral guide.'The Earth is turning after all. The Foucault's Pendulum has just proved this scientifically.' 

The revolutionary cruiser Aurora did not accept us for some reason, but we listened to the Admiralty’s Cannon fired each day to mark the noon, and visited The Piskaryovskoye Cemetery with green lawns over mass graves and the pool by the dark wall for the visitors to throw coins in.

The day when we went to Peterhof was cloudy and crossing the Finnish Gulf we could not see the sea but only fog and a circle of yellowish water with low waves around the boat, like on a lake with a sandy bottom.
It was boring and dank, and when I got out of the passenger hall and climbed down the short ladder to the low stern churned up yellow water behind it, the boat boy came and told that passengers were not allowed there. 
I climbed back and he hung a chain on the ladder and started to wash the deck of the stern with a mop.
But the Peterhof fountains jetted pillars of surprisingly white water.

Everything in Leningrad turned out to be as beautiful as one would expect.
The weather got nice again, and on the first floor in the Naval Museum stood the boat of Peter the Great, almost the size of a brigantine, and the paintings depicting sea battles of the Russian fleet, starting with the battle in the Sinop Bay, hung on the second.

On the first floor of the Zoological Museum, a skeleton of whale bones towered high, and the central attraction on the second floor was the composition of life in Antarctica behind the glazed partition. 
The white snowfield was painted in the back and near the glass there stood a few adult penguins with their beaks up in the air. 
They were surrounded with a kindergarten of penguin chicks of different ages to show how they change when growing.
At first, I liked them very much – such fluffy cute creatures, but then the thought that all of them were stuffed animals abated my delight. 
Three dozen living birds killed for the exposition.
I did not want to look further and went down to the gnawed whale skeleton and out of the Museum.

In a glazed stall by the Zoological Museum, I bought a ballpoint pen—they did not sell such in Konotop yet—and two spare ampoules to it, folks said one of them would do for a month of scribbling... 

That day I was the first to finish the midday meal at the canteen and went out to the bridge over the Moika to wait for the rest of our group. 
Between the high walls of the river banks, a small white cutter cautiously made its way, dividing the black water into two long bumpy waves. 
Then an elderly man came up to me over the bridge and warned that my pants were stained on behind.
I knew about it. 
Two days earlier I had sat down on a bench somewhere and it left a whitish stain in the seat of my pants as if of pine resin.
It was unpleasant but I could not get rid of it with any rubbing or scratching. 
He asked where I was from.
‘We’ve come on an excursion. From Ukraine.’
The friendliness on his face sagged.
‘Ukraine,' he said. 'In the war years, they burned my side with the blowtorch there.' 
I remembered the buzz of a blue flame bursting from the nozzle of the blowtorch, and the black skin of Masha’s carcass.
He grew silent and so did I.
I somewhat felt guilty for being from the places where he was tortured.
It's good that our group, at last, came out of the canteen. 

The Poltava’s excursion group left two days earlier than ours.
On the last evening in Leningrad, we went to the circus tent. 
The places were at the top, under the canvas roof.
It was a united performance of circus artists from fraternal countries.

A pair of Mongolian acrobats synchronously jumped onto the end of a see-saw to toss up the third one standing on the other end.
The tossed man did a somersault in the air and landed on the shoulders of the artist standing in the arena. 
The pushers launched another one and one more – three people were placed upon the man below, like after the Battle of the Kalka River.
The gymnasts from DDR worked on four high bars put in a square so that they could fly from one bar to another.
Then the Czech trainers brought a group of monkeys out and those spun and circled on the bars left after the Germans, only much funnier. 

The next day we left without going to the canteen, probably, because of having run out of the coupons.
There was a very convenient train, without any train changes on the route through Orsha and Konotop.
Only the departure was in the evening and after all the ice cream eaten during the excursion, paying for the ticket to the circus tent, and the purchase of a ball pen, there remained just twenty kopecks of all the ten rubles given by Mother.
I had of a pair of pirozhki for the midday meal, but at about five o'clock, when we were already sitting in the waiting room at the station, Lyudmila Konstantinovna noticed my despondency and asked what the matter was. 
I confessed that I was hungry and had no money.
She lent me one ruble.

In a deli near the station, I bought bread and a big fish in oily brown skin tied around with thin strings. 
With the prey wrapped in a paper, I returned to the station with our train already at the platform. 
In the car, I immediately sat down at the table under the window and began to eat. 
Very tasty fish it was, easily crumbling but slightly dry in the end.
I ate half and the rest wrapped back and put it on the third level bunk designated not for sleeping but putting the luggage on.

Some single fellow traveler, a couple of years older than me, got seated at the opposite side of the table, took out a deck of cards and offered to play ‘fool’ with him.
I won a couple of times and, when he once again was shuffling the cards, flashed one of the Kandeebynno’s jokes:
'The poorer the head's job, the more work for hands.’
He squinted at the girls from our excursion sitting under the window over the aisle and retorted:
‘The less you yak the safer you are.’
I saw a genuine rage in his eyes and after winning another game refused to play on.
He seemed glad to stop it too...

We arrived in Konotop in the morning after an unusually heavy rain.
During the night in the car, something had happened to my shoes – they became too small size. 
I forced them on but not completely, and my heels were hanging outside. 
Hobbling painfully, I got off the car onto the platform and waited for our excursion to disappear into the underground passage leading to the Station. 
Then, I took my shoes off and in the socks only went along the wet Platform 4 to the familiar breach in the fence at the very end of it. 

Across the road from the breach stood the Railway Transportation College, I passed by and entered the Bazaar.
No one was surprised with my walking in socks carrying a disfigured shoe in each hand because there were neither passers-by nor traffic around but huge puddles everywhere.
After the Bazaar the ground disappeared altogether under the water surface.
I splashed along the tram track stepping on the railhead that stuck above the water and reaching the Nezhin Street just waded ahead indiscriminately – the hutta was not too far already.

Later, Mother laughed sharing with the neighbors that from the main cities I brought only a pair of shoes one centimeter too short for my feet.
I hadn’t heard or read anywhere that it’s possible to grow your feet one centimeter in just one night...

On the first of September, Mother gave me one ruble to repay the debt.
However, at the lining-up in the schoolyard, Lyudmila Konstantinovna was nowhere to be seen and in the teachers’ room, they told me she was sick.
They explained that she lived in the two-story apartment block by the Bazaar. 

I took the money to her place.
She started to say that there was no need for such a haste.
She even seemed to be not very happy that I had returned that debt at all.
Then her father came in and I was surprised – that was Konstantin Borisovich, the projectionist of the Club!
The world was a small place indeed.

(…if I were to be asked now about the most vivid impression of those got in the cultural capital of Russia,
I'd answer without a moment’s hesitation: the evening in the street with a stone parapet from which stone steps go down to the vast width of the Neva River by the Palace Bridge; the wave hitting the lower step with a splash and high spatter, and the sharp shrieks of the girls of our excursion standing on the second step above the water…)

And yet Lenin was right that there's no force as mighty as the force of habit.
Take, for example, the albums of beau monde young ladies, where Eugene, with a careless stroke of his pen, sketched out his author’s whiskered profile on the page following an autograph of a certain Lieutenant Rzhevsky.
Any decent young lady had such an album for the outpouring her personal feelings and creative scribbling of her acquaintances and guests. 

Of course, I have never kept such albums in my hands, but after a whole lot of wars, three revolutions and radical changes in the way of life, the albums for the sentimental exercises of a girl's soul still existed. 
The struggle for life taught them disguise.
No silk bows on the cover, no creamy pages. 
A general-purpose ruled-paper notebook in brown leatherette covers for thirty-eight kopecks – that's what the albums of girls in our class looked like. 
In place of long-nosed self-portraits of aristocratic rascallions there came pictures cut out from the color photos in ‘Ogonyok' magazine and mounted on glue. 
The poems, though, managed to survive:

  Why? O, I don’t know why
  A tram needs rails to go far or nigh
  Why? O, I don’t know why
  Why do parrots scream and cry?
  I do not know why…

Well, and of course, all sorts of wise thoughts and winged expressions: 

“The one who loves will forgive anything”
“Cheating kills love”

When such an album, accidentally forgotten on a desk, fell in a guy's hands, he, having turned over a couple of pages, would slap it back on the desk – some ‘girlish nonsense'. 
Yet to me, for some reason, those albums were interesting and I dutifully studied.
As a result, I got an offensive nickname of ‘she-butterfly' among the schoolmates. 

Nobody called me that to my face, even though when our class lined-up at the PE lesson I was only the fourth in the line and the shortest guy, Vitya Malenko, could beat me up in wrestling under the giggling of the girls. 
Yes, I have never heard that nickname, but if your sister and brother attend the same school there is no secret for you about you that you don’t know.

The school principal Pyotr Ivanovich Bykovsky, unlike the cosmonaut Bykovsky, had a Herculean physique.
When all the classes were lined-up in the long—from the teachers’ room up to gymnasium—corridor, the floorboards paint-coated in red creaked pitifully under his measured steps along the line of students.
The mighty dome of his head, with the trailing locks across it, towered half a head over the ranks of the tallest – graduating class.
The look of his big eyes from under the heavy eyelids sleepily passing your face made your inside contract involuntary even knowing that the paper sent from the Children Room of Militia had nothing to do with you and he would call another guy to get out of the ranks and face the lined-up schoolmates. 
So, no surprise that when our class Mistress, Albina Grigoryevna, told me to stay after classes and go to the Principal Office, my heart sank.

At that state—with my heart sunk and my spleen squezzed—I timidly knocked on the high door of his office followed by uncomprehending but farewell glances from Kuba and Scully.

In the long and narrow office with one window facing the door, Pyotr Ivanovich was sitting at the desk, which hardly reached him to the waist, in profile to the entering.
He told me to sit down on one of the chairs lined up along the wall opposite his desk.
I got seated expectantly and he slowly opened a thin copybook to keep a long silence over it, jerking angrily his thick clear-cut lips.
‘It is your essay on Russian literature,’ he announced at last.
‘You are writing here that the sky in the summer is not as blue, as in the fall.’
He looked into the copybook and read:
“… in summer it looks as if sprinkled with the dust at the edges...”
‘Where have you seen such a sky?’
 I recognized the incomplete quotation – from the opening sentence of my essay on the free theme: “I’m sitting by the window and thinking...” which was our home-assignment the week before.
‘In the Nezhin Street,’ answered I.

He began to drive it home to me, that it absolutely didn’t matter – be it the Nezhin Street, or the Professions Street, or the Depot Street, but the sky always remained the same both in its center and along its the edges.
And the blue was always blue.
And in the summer it’s blue, and so in the fall, because blue was blue.

On my timid attempt at maintaining my own standpoint on the sky blueness, he once again repeated his weighty arguments and I surrendered.
‘Yes, the same.’ said I.
‘That’s good. So, this your sentence is wrong.’

And we continued the same way.
He shattered every sentence in my essay into pieces, one by one, and I, after a short resistance, agreed.

From the lower corner of the window, thin iron bars beamed up in a divergent pattern, the walls squeezed the high ceiling of the corridor-like office, the heavy desk towered over the lined-up chairs, the convex sphere of the Principal's skull hovered over the desk with its cobweb of hair wisps unable to hide the bald, like a globe standing still in the locked storeroom of the School House Manager… 

And I renounce, line by line, from the beginning to the very end.
I renounce all and every sentence in my essay.

Yes, Pyotr Ivanovich, you’re right, I was completely wrong…
It’s wrong that I did not want to write following the template suggested by the teacher:
“Walking down the street I heard schoolchildren arguing about Tatyana Larina from the Pushkin’s immortal poem and on coming home I got seated by the window and started to think again about her, analyzing her social background and her love to the Russian nature...”

Yes, it's completely wrong that schoolchildren would rather discuss motorcycles, karate, and fishing but not Tatyana Larina's characteristic features. 
That’s an absolutely thoughtless and erroneous sentence.
When I agreed with him on all the points, he gave the copybook to me and said that I could go but I should think of it again.

I went out to the empty school.
From the entrance door came sounds of tin buckets rumbling against the iron sinks and the swish of water filling the buckets from the taps – the janitors had already started washing the floors. 
I numbly went by those five taps without looking at my reflection passing through five mirrors above the sinks.

From the high brick porch, I descended with an dizzy feeling that I was not myself and not sure of now what and how and whereto. 
Perhaps, Galileo felt the same after betraying his discovery.

At the gate, I stopped and opened my copybook. 
Below the essay there was put a fractional mark:
 the denominator (content evaluation) was blank, and the divisor (grammar evaluation) – four.
And after the mark, in the same red ink, Zoya Ilyinichna wrote, in that diligently pretty handwriting of hers, four pages of her own essay that I was wrong and belied the Soviet youth.
I should remember the winged words from the novel ‘How the Steel was Tempered’, and remember the heroes of Krasnodon underground, and the heroes of the Red Army…

(...from that time on, I wrote following the templates; the ‘berserk’ publicist Belinsky didn’t become out of me nipped in the bud…)

The Physics classroom of School 13 was well equipped.
Curtains of dense blue cloth hung from the iron rings running along the string-cables above the windows. 
They were pulled together before demonstrating educational films in different school subjects.
But there was no screen – the films were projected onto a large square of frosted glass frame in the wall above the blackboard.
Just like a 2 x 2 meters TV for you.

The film projector was put in the back room behind that frame in the wall. 
In addition to the projector and tin cans of films, it had lots of shelves with different lenses, tripods, rheostats, weighs and other untold treasures in boxes, caskets, cases – for staging various experiments from the textbooks on physics and chemistry. 
And also the gray trunk-like tape recorder ‘Saturn’ loaded with the tape on two white reels.

The film projectionist and keeper of all those hoards was the teacher of Physics, Emil Grigoryevich Binkin, a calm handsome man of about thirty with his eyebrows slightly twitched up his straight forehead to meet the short wisps of the curly black hair well matching the swarthy skin of his face.
During the breaks, he stacked and reshuffled the things collected in the treasury while quietly whistling all kinds of melodies, so clearly and subtly without the slightest clam. 

I had a wary attitude towards him.
First, for the abolishing of my reading at his Physics lessons.

Normally, I brought to school some library book and at the lessons, I opened the folding part of the desktop, put the book on the shelf for the briefcase and – full ahead, Captain Blood! Let's board them! 
Teachers were also happy – so quiet a boy, no trouble at all. 
Though occasionally some of them made attempts at breaking the serene co-existence – I obviously was busy with anything but their lesson.
‘Ogoltsoff! What have I just said?’
But even immersed in a different, Antarctic-Tropical-Martian world I did not completely disconnect from the surrounding school reality.
Some float on the edge of consciousness received, as a muffled background, the current sounds in the classroom.
‘Ogoltsoff!’
Aha, it’s time to come up the surface.
The memory rewinds the background recording for half a minute back.
‘You, Alla Iosifovna, have just said that ‘read’ is an irregular verb.'
‘Get seated!!’
And then at the Class Parents Meeting, she would complain to Mother: 
‘I clearly see that he’s busy with something miles away from the lesson it's only that I can't run him down.’

Binkin had no problems with running me down.
He did not demand to repeat, he asked questions:
‘So, what conclusion can be made? Ogoltsoff?’
And that’s where no mechanical rewind of the previous background could come to the rescue.
How to draw conclusions from you didn’t know what?
Especially under the sights of an ironic look of dark eyes over the thin rim of glasses. 

He was killing with his cool calmness and seemed to know what page the book for bootleg reading was open at.
I had sometimes to get prepared for the Physics lessons and reading was postponed till Chemistry and Algebra.
No, I couldn't disdain Binkin.

Only once it came to an arm wrestling. 
On the point of temperature difference of physical bodies.
He asked whether the temperature of the boiled potato and the soup around it was the same.
I answered – no, it’s different.
‘Alas, but physics says yes, the same.’
‘Yesterday, I ate soup for the midday meal and it was fine, but then I bit through a potato in it and burned my tongue. Why did not physics help me out?’
The laughter of the classmates mingled with bell ringing for a break.

That is why I was astounded when our Class Mistress, Albina Grigoryevna, announced that on Sunday, at eleven o'clock I should be at School 11 for the City Olympiad on Physics. 
It was a sunny Sunday morning when I went out of the Nezhin Street to the tram stop by our school. 
The prestigious School 11 was on the other side of the Over-Underpass, halfway between it and the Railway Station.
Our Settlement red tram with its round—like a clown’s nose—lamp under the driver cab came up to the stop.
Under the nose-lamp, there was the inventory number of the car – 33. 
I fully understood, that all that was a pure nonsense and superstition, however, did not want to let the opportunity pass by. 
If there were double digits, say, 22 or 77 and so forth in a car license plate, or in the number printed on a ticket to a movie, or on a ticket the conductor sold you in a tram, that meant you were in luck.
You should ball your fist and inaudibly pronounce the incantation:
‘The luck is mine. Full–period!’
Which I did.

At the Olympiad among the fourteen-year-old students from the fourteen city schools, I solved some problems about acceleration and specific weight, and density, but not all.
To the concluding question:
‘Why do we first see the lightning and only then hear the thunder?’
I even draw a pencil sketch explaining the interval between the flash and bang.

Next week Binkin with an unconcealed surprise announced that I took the first place among the eighth graders at the city Olympiad in Physics.
I did not know whether the number under the nose of the tram brought luck, or the solution checkers were impressed with the clumsy lightning but it’s nice to realize that you had beaten the representative of the prestigious School 11 and even the guy from School 12 with its mathematical specialization.
Get it from the Plant Settlement guys!

‘The Dead Season’ was being shown in the Club.
The three of us bought tickets to ensure the show.
At times, when no tickets were sold the projectionists refused was open to show the film for only the check-passers.
However, the audience turned out big enough.
Not so many as at the Indian ‘Zita and Guita’ but half of the auditorium had got filled.

The movie was about our secret agent in the United States starring Donatas Banionis from ‘No One Wanted to Die' where he was shot at the end and fell on the desk without finishing the note he was writing. 

And in America, they followed him for a long time then caught and jailed for twenty years, but then exchanged for a CIA agent caught in the Soviet Union. 
A black and white film, but of the widescreen format.
Banionis was wearing a luxurious white shirt.
You could at once see that was not nylon, but he cooked in that shirt it in the kitchen, only turned up the sleeves. 

A cool movie, in general.
When it was over, we slowly moved towards the exit – yea, some folks managed to live an interesting life.
And then Kuba slammed his muskrat-fur hat against his fist and said:
‘Okay! First thing in the morning – to meet Solovey and enroll a school of secret agents!' 
Skully and I laughed and laughed and laughed because Solovey was the Precinct Militiamen at the Settlement.

Actually, no one called him ‘the Precinct Militiaman’, they just said ‘Solovey’ and everyone got it at once.
When he entered the Bazar, a muffled ‘sol!..- sol!..- sol!..’ swished along the counters and crowding caboodle.
The old peasant women from Podlipnoye or Popovka buried deeper in their bags the glass bottles and hot water bottles with moonshine to make them out of sight. 
Then they returned to the legitimate part of their trade standing behind the counter with a glass of black seeds, or a braid of onions – law-abiding goods.
But no kidding with Solovey‘s scent!
And more than once, under loud curses from the trader, he poured onto the ground the bootlegged ‘samohrie’ from her sturdy bag.
Once some drunk could not stand the temptation, fell on his four bones and lapped the moonshine from the puddle.
Solovey pounced on him, and a couple of times drove his boot into the alky's side, but the guy was in the Land of Happiness already. 
Well, the vehicle arrived and he was taken to the Sobering-up Station.

Yet, Solovey got his share as well at times.
They would trap him someplace in the dark and warm him up with a blizzard of beating.
One time they poured kerosene over him and set on fire, in another sorting out his arms were broken with a crowbar. 
Well, the guys would get their prison terms, he’d recover and again – to the Bazaar in the red militiaman cap and there again:
‘sol!..- sol!..- sol!..’

So, Kuba made a good joke about enrolling a secret service school through Solovey...

During the winter holidays, the winners of the City Olympiad in Physics were taken to the city of Sumy, for the Regional Olympiad. 
In the Konotop group, there were four boys and a girl, a ninth-grader. 
Though, she, actually, looked quite an adult girl.
In Sumy, we were accommodated for a night stay in a hotel. 
The number of boys coincided with the quantity of beds in the room. 
Our mentor was a teacher from School 12 of Math and Physics specialization and he stayed somewhere further along the corridor and the girl-like-an-adult in some female number.
Soon everybody gathered in our room.
The head of the group came with a couple of Collections of Tasks and Exercises in Physics for Matriculants.
Jee!
I had never seen such books and until that moment the school textbooks were, in my opinion, all there was in physics. 
It was a misconception.
The rest of the future Einsteins from Konotop met the Collections as their good acquaintances and even bosom friends. 
They began to actively discuss in which sections there were complex tasks and in which not so much so.
The teacher offered to work out some of the tasks, just for a knock-up.
Everyone immediately started scribbling formulas and explaining them to each other.
I clearly was ‘the sixth odd’ in the company.
The problems were far beyond those that Binkin solved with us on the class blackboard.

Then we went out to the city to have a meal at a canteen. 
On the way back I lagged behind and furtively admired the gait of the girl-like-an-adult.
The green coat tightly fitted her wide figure and every step produced oblique folds in the coat's cloth on her back. 
Flick to the right, flick to the left.
Hither-thither.
Flick-flick.

In fact, all I saw was a long coat, boots and a knitted hat.
There’s nothing to look at but those rhythmic folds on her back.
Falling back to the Onegin’s epoch cant – they drove me crazy.

Though seemingly a trifle, they were not that for a connoisseur and collector of like things.
Some books were reread for more than once just because I knew there were a couple of lines about it.
A couple of miserly lines, but they contained a specific detail, which I would put in my secret casket for later use.

For instance, in a sci-fi story by Harry Harrison about the time machine, a film-shooting crew jumped in the year of one thousand to make an action movie.
Their male star got an accident and they had to replace him with a local Viking.
The film director was instructing the newly baked actor which actions were expected of him:
‘You rush into a bedroom in the castle you’ve just seized.
You see a half-awake beauty and throw away your weapon.
Sit down on the bed next to her and slowly move her bra strap to fall from her shoulder. 
That’s all. The scene is done.
The rest the watchers will imagine for themselves.
And, take my word, their imagination is something you can always put your trust in!’

Aha! That’s the long-awaited-for detail!
The bra strap smoothly sliding from the soft round shoulder…
That’s not a vague ‘kiss on the sugar-sweet lips’ for you.
And the same evening with the blanket pulled over my head and the eyes closed tightly, I burst into a half-asleep beauty’s bedroom.
But, of course, without any stupid cameras and highlights.
I am not a movie Viking but a real-life one and we are having the real Middle Ages around here. 

I throw away my shield and sword and flick her bra strap off.
At first, she resists but after looking at the handsome features of my face she willingly spreads on the bed.
I roll on top of her body…
A hot wave floods the lower part of the belly…
My dick twitches in a boner…
My eyes are shut…
And I…
What?!!!
I do not know what’s next.

So, it’s time to rest and then dive into the coveted casket for some other secret detail and already around that one build up a situation leading to a painfully sweet state.

(...Leo Tolstoy fervently advocated against masturbation.
Any real saint starts his career as an unscrupulous sinner, otherwise, there won't be the torments of self-denying which elevate a man above a merely animal level.

I cannot make a final conclusion whether my erection orgies may be classified as an ordinary masturbation.
On the one hand, there was no mechanical friction applied with the palms and I had no cum.
But on the other hand, what if that was only a prelude?
The initial part.
What if not for my brother sleeping next to me on the same couch I’d go astray and join the ranks of 95% of all males with Leo Tolstoy and the classics of Italian cinematography at the head?..)

Once in our schoolyard, Kuba asked: 
‘Did you know that wanking originate a hair growth on palms?’
Scully and I looked at our hands synchronously under Kuba’s guffaw.
I knew that my palms were sinless, but I looked at them.
Out of pure instinct.

So it turned out that the folds flicking this way that way in front were not a neglectable trifle.
Maybe in some future session of my contactless masturbation, the green coat would open and a tender voice call:
‘Are you cold too? Come closer. Let’s warm each other...’
And I…
What?!!.

In the evening the mentor again brought the book of problems and insistingly suggested to pay attention to such and such numbers. 
The winners gave them short shrift, and I only silently looked over their shoulders keeping the countenance of a weathered problem cracker.

The Regional Olympiad took place in some institute for higher education.
In the auditorium for eighth graders, every competitor was given a thin copybook with an ink stamp on each of its double sheets. 
On the first page, you had to write your name and where you were from. 
The following one or two were for rewriting the problems from the blackboard, six tasks all in all.
Jee! Three of them turned out to be the ones that the previous evening our mentor was solving with the wise guys in the hotel room.
But the morning had not made me any wiser, the problems seemed as unapproachable as they were last evening.

It was boring to sit idly yet to get up and leave at once looked impolite.
The tense silence of concentrated work of brains reigned around.
Opening the last page in the copybook I started a pencil sketch of a pirate.
I could vividly imagine his face – the broad mustache, the eyes big as plums, and a turban on his head. 
And he was glancing over his shoulder.
But on the paper, everything went wrong. 
Even the pistol with a widening muzzle, like those by the robbers in ‘The Snow Queen', did not make it better. 
Hmm, I did not live up to being Isaac Newton and turned out too lousy a painter for becoming Repin. 
I recollected Father’s ass that pulled him out of the Party Studies School.
It looked like I had to walk out on my own foot…
I took the copybook to the inspectors' desk and left... 

Of course, the fiasco in so important areas—Physics and Painting—became a moral stress for me.
To deaden the harsh feeling of defeat, or in a nutshell, from grief, I bought a pack of cigarettes with filter – ‘Orbit’ for thirty kopecks.
However, the orbital test was delayed until my return to Konotop where I waited two days more for a right moment to retire with the tempting pack to the outhouse in the garden. 

One drag. Another.
A fit of coughing.
Transparently greenish bagels floated before the eyes.
Nausea.
All the symptoms described by Mark Twain in Tom Sower’s case.
We should put more trust in classics, not to throw the almost intact pack of ‘Orbit’ into the dark hole in the outhouse floor...

Opposite the Station square, across the tram track and the asphalt road there was the park named after Lunacharsky, the first Soviet Minister of Education, with alleys of tall trees and curtains of trimmed bushes.
Not far from the park entrance, a white monument to Lenin stood on a tall gray pedestal facing the Railway Station.
With his left hand clutching the jacket lapel, he lowered his right one at full arm's length and a little withdrew it back in a politically poetic attitude. 
Behind the monument, peered through the lined-up trees the massive cube of the three-storied Culture Palace named after Lunacharsky, in Konotop parlance just the Loony. 
Not the Minister of Education, of course, but the Culture Palace.

It bore no architectural excesses – flat walls, square windows, rectangular entrance.
The Loony, actually, had four stories, the fourth, comprising the auditorium for film shows, was deep in the basement.
However, since the same films were shown at Club only one week later where we could see them free thanks to check-passes from the Club Director, the Loony was not within the scope of our interests. 
The excitement about the Loony Culture Palace broke out in the second half of the academic year when there started the season of the Club of Jolly and Inventive, aka CJI, games between the city schools.
Then everybody wanted to get into the auditorium on the second floor with the smooth parquet floor and close rows of blue-velvet-covered seats.

They did not sell the tickets to the CJI.
I had to beg a ticket from the School Pioneer Leader, and Volodya Gourevitch would answer that the ticket distribution was in the hands of the City Komsomol Committee and it's not his fault they allotted so few for our school and our teachers in the Teachers' Room had ripped them off from him already. 
The tickets had no seat numbers marked so it was wiser to come in advance to occupy a seat and not stand all the game in the aisles or perch on the narrow marble window sill at the end of the hall with your back to the dark cold night behind the window panes, for that was winter after all... 

In winter the Physical Education classes were held outside.
The teacher Lyubov Ivanovna unlocked the dark ‘cell’ next to the mutual door to the Pioneer Room and the School Libray.
Each student grabbed a pair of skis and poles leaned against the blind walls of the ‘cell' and went to the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street to run under the poplars along the train line. 
Lyubov Ivanovna looked into her big round stopwatch and announced the results.
Next to her stood a pair of girls who on that day for some reason could not run and kept the class register for Lyubov Ivanovna to put her marks for the sporting achievements. 

Some interesting equality of sexes, eh?
The girls could run or not run at their wish, but if you’re a boy nobody ever asked whether you wanted it or not – run! Run!
The fastener-straps on school skis were much too hard.
They didn't hold a candle to those made by Father from thick rubber bands in old days at the Object. 
But I did not bring my skis to school for PE lessons, they were for extracurricular usage...

That day after the midday meal we, three friends, went skiing on the hill behind the Grove in the vicinity of Podlipnoye.
The hill was quite steep but we glided no more than a couple of times when two grown-up guys came from the village and demanded our skis. 
One of them even wanted to hit Kuba, but Kuba ducked and glided down out of reach. 
Scully and I followed but not in the steepest place.
Those two followed running on foot and at the edge of the Grove, the faster runner stepped on the end of my ski. 
I fell.

When I got up I saw that Scully had already removed his skis, bunched them onto his shoulder and ran dodging between the dark trunks of the winter Grove. 
The picture was obscured by a head in a black rabbit-fur hat with loosened flaps.
The fur of the visor covered his eyes and only the smirk of his thick lower lip remained visible.
That portrait disappeared as well when I took it on the nose and collapsed by a tree.

‘Got it? Take off the ski!’
His buddy ran up in a moment.
He was either less drunk or more sensitive – the snow around was spattered with sizable drops of blood trickling from my nose.
So they just told me to get lost and left towards the village.

I slowly skied through the Grove plugging my nose with lumps of snow.
When one got red through, I rolled up another…

In the side street near the school, I was met by Kuba. 
He looked into my face and told I’d better wash it under the tap, and he also said that Volodya Gourevitch was waiting for us in the classroom of the tenth graders to discuss something.

In the schoolyard, I took off my skis and went up the porch of the empty school.
The blood was oozing no more.
By five o’clock the janitors had been already left.
Only the watchman remained in the school building and sometimes a group of pioneers preparing a collective recital under the button-accordion of the School Pioneer Leader.

In the mirror above the sink I saw that it was not my face – the nose two times thicker than mine and under it, there was a mustache painted with brown makeup. 
The chin was also stained with gore.
I washed and when Kuba said it wouldn't become any better, I wiped my face with a handkerchief. 
The pulse throbbed dully in the nose. 

In the classroom where Kuba led me to, there was only Volodya Gourevitch. 
Delicately keeping his glances off my face so as not to hurt my puffed up nose, he made a speech about a crying shame, that each year our school had been kicked out from CJI in the first pool of the game. 
The result of our over-reliance on the graduation classes.
We had to break that vicious practice.
We had to find new forces.
New blood was what we needed.
I looked back at Kuba.
He shrugged his shoulders and Volodya Gourevitch declared that I would be the Captain of the CJI team of School 13.
The throb of pulsation became more distinct yet not in the nose but in the nape as from that publication of a stranger's story signed with my name in ‘The Pioneer’ magazine.

A month later the CJI team from School Thirteen unexpectedly won their first game.
At the greeting contest, Kuba and I came on stage in real tails and bicorns from auntie Tanya's Costume Room at the Plant Club. 

Napoleon (acted by me) was in his swell attitude – the right hand on his chest, the left one, balled into the fist, pressed to the back above the buttocks. 
With heartfelt lyricism I thoughtfully recited the famous line:
‘Moscow! How much for Russian heart converged in your name’s sound!’
Then, shaking the poetic enchantment off, sounded the abrupt order to Marshal Murat: 
‘Burn Moscow down!’
Kuba sniffed his nose and replied:
‘Okay, sire! We’ll do it!’
The hall rolled in laughter and the rest of our team came on stage in casual clothes and bicorns made of Whatman paper to the sounds of the button-accordion from behind. 
We still joked a bit and won the greeting contest, and, eventually, the whole game. 

That way, joking and easy going, we reached the final game in May because everyone had learned already that we were a strong team and if not to laugh at our jokes then to whose else? 
At the contest of the Captains, it was enough for me to place my hands into the Napoleon attitude and move my chin to the right and up in Mussolini-like manner and the audience would readily guffaw. 

I just did not like that the script of our first victorious start-up was copied from the TV.
We just repeated the performance of a CJI team on the Central TV a few years before.
Volodya Gourevitch laughed out loud in response and repeated that the winners were not liable to censure.
All the same, it was like dubbing your name over another guy's stuff. 

So, the concluding seconds of the final game were running out and the Jury Chairman read on his mic:
‘...and the winner becomes the CJI team of School 13!’
Still not believing in what I heard, I, together with the whole hall shouted ‘A-a-a!’
I turned to our team and saw that they were rushing towards me – and Kuba, and Scully, and Sasha Uniat from the ninth grade, and Sasha Rodionenko from ours, and they also shouted ‘A-a-a!’ while running.
And then, instead of them, a white light and blue curtains flew at me.
I did not immediately realize that coming up to me and flying off were the neon daylight lamps in the ceiling of the stage.
They were tossing me in the air... 

The following year we won again but there was no Captain tossing already.
In the tenth grade, we reached the finals but lost to the prestigious School 11. 
At that final game, we parroted a CJI team at the Central Television from the current year.
The game on TV was still too fresh in the memory of many and we were accused of brazen plagiarism.

But all that was still in the future and so far I was still listening to a fiery speech about the change of school generations and the pulsation from my nose moved to the back of my head.
I was surprised to think about the sudden swerves in the tidal currents of fate: in just one day the rise from a trampled skier to Captain, damn it!
So, I had no grounds to take offense at my fate.
Only from that day, my flawlessly Roman nose remained a bit turned to the right. 

Fate, aka fortune, does not go as a crow fly but follows a sine curve like a tipsy drunkard and besides it undulates up and down: the crest – a trough; the peak – a pothole. 
Yesterday, for example, Volodya Gourevitch with a loud laugh handed me a postcard posted on School 13 in my name.
It was sent by the ninth-grader girl-like-adult who participated in the Regional Olympiad in Physics.
Congratulations on the victory in the CJI with a screwed-in quotation from Mayakovsky: 
‘Shine everywhere and always shine!..’

I did not reply prevented by the jolly laughter of Volodya or, maybe, ashamed by her unawareness that I had been unbuttoning her green coat under my blanket. 

And today I went to the Peace Square because my sister told that near the building where they sold kvass in summer from the yellow barrel-trailer, there was put a booth for refilling ballpoint pen ampoules for just ten kopecks.
In bookshops, they sold such ampoules, both short and long, charging twenty-two kopecks apiece. 

On the way back I stood near the driver’s cab with a large poster fixed on the glass wall from inside, the size of an open newspaper with the headline ‘Rules For Using Tram in the City of Konotop of Sumy Region’.
Did other cities have different rules?
Or had anyone, except me, read those columns of the Rules items?
The rules to how to correctly ride a tramcar. 
How much the ticket cost.
Whom to cede your seat to.
And in the end about the measures of administrative penalties and the three-ruble fine for being caught without a ticket.
A good quality paper in the poster, and seen at a glance that thicker than a newsprint.

The conductors with their strapped handbags had disappeared from trams long ago.
In place of the tickets came paper coupons sold by the driver from their cabin through a small window in the cabin door.
Only that window located not comfortably making you stoop so too low when buying the coupons.
Yet for a driver in their seat, exactly right height. 

Between the windows in tram walls, they had screwed up small boxes with lever-handles. 
Inserting your coupon in the slot of the box, you pulled the lever to punch the paper with a series of holes.
Looking at them closely you could make out certain digits.
Occasionally a pair of inspectors boarded the car at the tram stops.
They asked the passengers to present their coupons and checked if those had right digits.
In the Tram Depot, they changed the digits in the levered boxes. 
Ain’t it smart?

Yet, any smartness could be outsmarted.
Some guys kept in their pocket a handful of used coupons and traveled for free handing the inspectors the whole bunch when being checked: 
‘How could I know which one is from this tram? You look for the right one.' 
The inspector, though, might have started carping: some coupons after a month ride in the pocket got really fretted. 
However, they'd sooner give up and move to the next passenger. 

Under those rules, I stood, although there were vacant seats, simply in winter standing seemed warmer than sitting. 
One guy boarded at the stop by Zelenchuk area.
I knew him though not by his name.
He was from the graduating class at our school, and I although saw him in the Club a couple of times. 
So he came up to me. 
Hey. Hey. How's all? So-so. 
And we went on standing silently.

Then I saw the jerk started clamping me as if a girl.
There was the tram pane on the right and the driver cab behind me with those darn Rules behind the handrail.
The clown grabbed the handrail and pressed me into the corner.
I told him:
‘Piss off! Stop horsing!’
But he only giggled and squinted his eyes yet didn't let go.
I looked at the passengers. 
They all were similarly looking through the windows as if on an excursion to a famous city as if something could be seen through the ice-coated panes. 
To put it short, I barely managed to wriggle out of his grip and stood on the steps by the door.
I had to put my clothes in order because of both the jacket and the sweater, well everything up to the naked skin, got jerked up. 

So a stupid asshole.
If you’re bent that way go and enroll Greko-Roman wrestling group at the Club’s Gym and rub against your partners on the mats.
And what humiliation for the famous CJI Captain to get into such sinusoidal flop.

And the following crest rolled up in late April at the All-Union game ‘Zarnitsa', aka ‘Heat-Lightning'. 
Nominally, the game was for pioneers, but it involved all the senior classes.
I was appointed the Commander of the United Formation of School 13.
No paper shoulder straps, no division into ‘blues’ and ‘greens’.
But everybody should be equipped with a knapsack with the field ammunition: a bowl and spoon, a needle and thread.

After the lining-up in the schoolyard where a PE teacher, Ivan Ivanovich, checked the contents in a pair of knapsacks, we went along the Bogdan Khmelnitsky Street, past the Bazaar and turned into the Budyonny Street.
There we passed the Plant Park and went down to the Swamp, aka Grove.
A thick fog covered all the movements of the column on the march.

We stopped at the Grove and the PE teachers, Ivan Ivanovich and Lyubov Ivanovna, opened a sealed envelope with our further route and mission. 
The column proceeded to the bridge in the high railway embankment.
Besides the main tracks, there was a local branching from under the bridge to the Meat-Packing Plant and following it we outflanked the Grove from the left.

The fog was thinning and through its rising wisps, there peeped a bumpy field. 
Ivan Ivanovich roared ‘To attack!’ and we ran across the field shouting ‘Hurray!’
I ran in the midst of the crowd and didn't feel my body.
It seemed to dissolve in the general attack and all I could feel were just wisps of the fog and the tussocky bumps jumping before and past me...

Then we stopped not far from Podlipnoye in the field with occasional thick-trunk elms.
The fog cleared completely and the day became glad and sunny.
A real army field-kitchen arrived from the village.
We were fed with hot soup.
Then we returned through the Grove to our school and lined up again.
As the commander, I stood to face the ranks, from the sixth to the tenth graders, and some cameraman shot us buzzing with his hand camera. 
The next week Volodya Sherudillo mockingly (but very funny) acted me standing in front of the ranks with slouched shoulders till the moment the camera was turned to me and I thrust out my chest so too bravely and stretched at attention almost to tiptoes.

(...I think sometimes: were it not for the daily water dragging from the pump to our hutta – might I have become taller than the fourth when our class lined up?..)

That spring I had a dream of a long journey and by no other means but a raft.
Most likely I was impressed by the Tour Heyerdahl's ‘Kon-Tiki'. 
I shared my dream with Kuba and Scully and they approved it, yeah, that would be great they said. 

We began to discuss the details of its realization.
If, say, the raft was built on the Seim river then with its flow, we would reach the river of Desna and further downstream to the mighty Dnieper river that flowed to the Black Sea.
And the journey should be completed before August because then Kuba would leave for examinations to a Navigators College and Scully to a Mountain Technical College in Donetsk. 

The dream lasted for two weeks and then it began to wither.
More and more insurmountable problems arose in the way of bringing it to life.
Okay. Suppose we’d make a deal with the watchman in the pine forest on the Seim river.
Then how to move a log from the forest to the river? To drag it half a kilometer?
But for a raft, you needed more than a log or two. 

And then I ran into a thought that finally smashed the dream into fragments.
I remembered that on the Dnieper, following the Lenin’s plan of GOERLO, they built a number of hydro-electric power stations with their dams across the river.
And that was an unsurpassable barrier. 
Could we take the raft apart to drag, log by log, to the other side of each dam?
Damn!

I did not tell my friend that the realization of Lenin’s dream of the electrification had crossed out our dream; I just stopped to discuss it with them.

Volodya Gourevitch, who also was an Ilyich, declared that we had to shatter the hegemony of School 11 at the city Ballroom Dancing Competitions. 

Of the two parallel eighth classes, five pairs of willing dancers gathered for the first training in ballroom dancing. 
Volodya Gourevitch demonstrated to us the movement of the ballroom waltz and then he played it on his button-accordion for us to dance. 
After that Scully refused to participate, he said he just did not want to.
Kuba and I lasted longer but very soon the group of prospective dancers disintegrated. 
What's the point to go on if, for example, my partner, Natasha Grigorenko, after finishing the eighth grade was moving to School 12 with its Math and Physics specialization which gave more chances to pass exams to some Institute after the school graduating? 

End May Kuba and I had a bike ride to the Seim River Bay beach to open the swimming season. 
It turned out that twelve kilometers of bike-riding along an even path under the railway embankment was not a too long distance.
On the beach, there was not a single soul except for us and our bikes getting their rest on the sand. 
And the water was still too cold but we took a swim all the same.

Then mosquito swarms flew from the bushes.
They buzzed and droned from all the sides and stung so too badly.
Probably, we had just fallen out of the habit during the winter.
We tried to bury ourselves in the sand, but the sand was also cold and didn’t protect from the cannibal mosquitoes.
We yelled like mad in the empty beach and then took another swim and rode back to Konotop.

We didn’t know yet that life, actually, is a series of losses, but felt that from that beach our ways diverge…

Yes. That year School 13 became the hegemon in everything except for the ballroom dancing. 
We won even the city schools competition in the concluding stage of the All-Union game ‘Zarnitsa’.

On a Sunday, the teams from city schools, six people each, under the supervision of their PE teachers went on a one day hike to the forest near the Seim River.
There were all sorts of competitions: for the best time in transporting an ‘injured', for putting up a two-man tent, for bandaging skills… 

My part in the competitions was measuring distances by eye. 
The umpire asked how many meters were to the tree over there and then silently recorded the estimations.
I followed the changes in his facial expressions.
Someone said the distance was twenty meter.
The umpire lifted his right eyebrow, perhaps, an overshoot.
On the assumption of fourteen meters, the umpire's mouth dropped its left corner – not enough. 
I called the average – seventeen meters.
With everyone through their guessing, the umpire checked his records and announced that my estimation was the most accurate – I didn’t need a tape-meter.

Yet everything had to be decided by the last contest – boiling water on fire in a ten-liter tin bucket.
No favoritism would help out, neither reading of facial expressions. 

The start given, the matches stroke matchboxes by the brushwood mounds readied for bonfires.
Dense white smoke gave way to crackling flames – it’s time to hang the bucket over the fire and add the firewood to it; the drier, the better.
The red tongues of fire fluttered unsteadily under the bucket licking its tin blackened with soot.
The bastard of a wind!
So much of flames kept by it away from under the bucket.
The team of School 12, trying to control the situation, held a blanket in their hands to block the wind from access to their fire. 
And we?

Our PE teacher Ivan Ivanovich, a wartime soldier, and an experienced fisherman scornfully waved aside their smartness. 
That’s all bullshit!
More brushwood, the drier, the smaller.
Put it on that side!

No textbook presented me with a clearer and more memorable idea of the stages in boiling water.
Heating; light steam over the water; formation of tiny bubbles on the vessel walls. 
The bubbles float up forming an agitated foam and, at last, the water in the bucket started to bump up, jump and splash and gush the white steam up. 

The umpire clicks his stopwatch.
Hooray! We are the first!
And School 12 were still standing around their bucket watching the bubbles on the tin walls.

The competitor teams boarded the buses.
Except for those who wanted to spend the night in two large tents. 
The bus to take them back to Konotop would arrive in the morning...

As twilight began to condense I went away from the glade with the tents into the depth of the forest.
In general, it was the same as at the Object only more deciduous than coniferous. 
Taking a leak I looked around.
Suddenly, a part of the forest moved and separated from the rest.
What’s happening?
The eye unaccustomed to that moving form started to make out something more or less understandable…
Wow! That’s a moose! What a whopper!
And it was standing so close to me…
Looking after the giant disappearing among the trees I thought that I did not in vain stay for the night. 

At night I regretted that I had stayed.
Due to inexperience and unbridled individualism, I lay down the last in the group of guys preparing for the night, next to the canvas wall of the tent.
The night chillness woke me up an hour later and forced to press my back against the penultimate guy in our sleeping group, in search of a drop of warmth. 

In the small hours, chilled to the extent of freezing, I got out of the tent when it was just about to start turning gray.
The ashes of the last night fire were dead yet two guys still sat nearby — a girl and a boy.
Probably, being foolish like me, they had tried to sleep at the edges, not in the middle of the group in their tent.

No bus came to pick us up.
Instead, a ‘goat'-Willys with a canvas top drove into the glade and we were told there happened some pickle. 
The collapsed tents and four girls filled all the room there was in the vehicle and the rest had to go to the city on foot carrying the two tent pillars, that did not fit into the ‘goat’, to the House of Pioneers.

It turned out that twelve kilometers on foot was a damn long distance, especially when dragging along a wooden tent pillar even though it's not too heavy. 
The guys from School 12 soon disappeared from view together with their pillar and we lagged behind diminishing in numbers because some people went ahead and we never caught up neither saw them that day. 
When we reached the tram stop in the city outskirts there remained only three of us: I, my classmate Sasha Skosar and the smooth green-paint-coated pillar of pine wood. 

(...I remember that we were dog-tired and hadn't the strength even for talking but that memory doesn't evoke any emotion. 
Perhaps, the emotions are dulled by repeated occurrences of the same state in the course of my life, yet the picture of a moose dissolving in twilight among the trees, which I can vividly see even now, calls a little smile to my lips – hey, Mr. Whopper, pass my best to Bamby!..)

In spring Father changed his workplace.
He moved from a locksmith at the Car Repair Shop Floor of the KaPeVeRrZe to the Shop Floor 19 at the Konotop Electro-Mechanical Plant, aka the KEMZ, aka "Red Metallurgist" Plant, also to a position of a locksmith. 
The salary of the KEMZ locksmiths was a trifle higher.
I did not know how much, I never was interested in such matters. 
After all, bringing money home was the care of Father and Mother.
I had cares of my own being up to my chin in the CJI, and the Club, and all sorts of Groups, and in books borrowed at the library. 
Well, and kerosene and water as well, but if they needed something from the Nezhin Store let them send Natasha or Sasha. 

Besides the salary, Father also earned some side money by repairing TV sets considered a hopeless case even by the specialists of the TV Repair Atelier.
About once a month after his day's work he would collect his pot-bellied satchel of green leatherette with a multimeter tester, the soldering iron, some radio spare parts and other equipment and leave until late at night. 
Then he’d come back, pretty sozzled, with a crumpled three rubles of earnings.
To the Mother’s scolding he'd answer:
‘Was it you to give the drink?’

Sometimes the procedure lasted for two evenings.
In the first Father came back home sober with neither money nor his satchel left at the client's hutta until the end of the repair. 

Especially complicated cases were brought to our hutta. 
Father put the dead TV on the table under the only window in the room, took off its case, which would go on top of the wardrobe, leaving on the table top just the entrails: the electronic tube and the skeleton of aluminum panels with radio lamps.
He would turn it over and over checking from all sides, muttering:
‘Well, so what's that that you want, then? Eh, dear girl?' 
 
In the dead of night I would be waked by sharp hissing – Father, in the niggardly light of the desk lamp, had brought bouncing white stripes running across the tube screen.
‘So, that’s why you refused to shoot! Was not loaded!’

Then for a couple of days, we watched the repaired TV (for its screen wider than that of ours) until the owner would come after it and take home the TV he'd already put a cross on. 
So, it’s not in vain that Father made the filings of those ‘The Radio’ magazines.

Mother also wanted to change her job but couldn’t find any other.
It was Father who helped her to get a job at the KEMZ.
He repaired the TV of the Personnel Manager and when asked about the charge, Father answered he did not want money, let his wife be given a job at the plant.
The Personnel Manager answered:
‘Okay. Bring her.’

At first, Mother could not believe it – six months before that very Manager told her flatly there were no jobs.
When the parents came together the Manager suggested Mother apply for a presser at the Pressing Shop Floor.
Though they worked in shifts there, the salary depended on their output and nobody took home less than a hundred of rubles. 

While Mother went to his secretary to fill the application form, the Manager laughed and told Father that he remembered her but the previous time he thought she was pregnant.
Pregnant women were not a good idea to give them a job.
They would work for one month and then get a year of paid maternity leave.
He wouldn’t be petted for giving jobs to pregnant.
But now he saw that it just so was her bodily structure.

That way Mother became a presser at the KEMZ.
She poured special powders into the molds of spare parts and switched the press on.
She worked two shifts – a week from eight to five, another week from five to half to twelve, with the shortened break for the meal.
In summer the press radiated the infernal heat and the molds were awfully heavy all year round.
After midnight the Konotop trams ran really rarely it took long waits to get from the KEMZ to the Over-Underpass.

But worse of all was pressing of the glass wool.
The fine glass dust made its way through the working robe and caused itching all over the body.
Even the after-work shower did not help.

But then in our hutta and in the yard there appeared a whole bunch of different boxes and thingamabobs made of plastic of different colors.
Mother brought home the defectively pressed spare parts or damaged at being pulled out from their molds.
So what if that one had a chink in the corner? It would make a classy modern ashtray.
Even Zhulka got a nice ribbed basin for drinking water.
All that because of ‘The Red Metallurgist' production was supposed for all kinds of units and safety systems in the mining industry. 

‘Mom,’ asked I, seemingly under the impression from one of the nihilist-authors,’What’s the meaning of your life? Why do you live at all?’
‘Why?’ answered Mother,’ To see how you grow up and become happy.’
And I shut up because at times I had brains enough not to be too clever...

The changes took place not only in our part of the hutta but in the whole of it.
One of the grannies-sisters from the Duzenko’s part returned to her village and the other moved to her daughter’s, somewhere in the five-story blocks of the Zelenchuk so that to rent her hutta to the lodgers.
A single mother, Anna Sayenko, moved in with her daughter Valentina. 

Valentina was a year older than me but didn't look so because of being short, red-haired, and skinny.
The nose was long though.
In the evenings she came out to play cards with the three of us, the younger and me, on the wide bench under the window by their porch.
A very comfortable bench it was – you could lean your back on the clay-plastered wall of the hutta in such an old whitewash that it left no traces.

During the game, taking advantage of the gathering twilight, I touched Valentina's shoulder with mine. 
So soft it was.
And everything began to swim…
She usually withdrew, but sometimes not immediately which made my pulse quicker, louder and hotter.
But then she stopped coming out for the game.
Probably, I squeezed too tightly into her shoulder. 

Father bought from the Duzenko’s son-in-law one of their two sections in the long mutual shed in the yard: the lean-to in the left end of the shed.
Once upon a time they kept a pig in that section and to make it warmer plastered with the cob its walls from outside. 
Father replaced the Ruberoid roofing felt with a tin roof, though not of new tin, of course.

Watching how dexterously he knocked a mallet interlocking the panels of the tin I was surprised how many skills he had and also the tools for all occasions. 
Take those tin-cutting scissors, for example, nothing of the kind was sold at stores.
And Scully too, whenever in need of a tool hurried to our hutta.
‘Uncle Kolya, gimme a drill.’
‘Uncle Kolya, may I take a needle file?’

In the wall opposite the entrance to the lean-to, Father inserted a hinged glazed frame like that in the veranda.
The electric wiring was run from our part in the shed, which was the next section, in fact. 
At his work, Uncle Tolik applied for waste crates, in which they brought to the RepBase chopper spare parts.
The crates were remodeled into the floor shields.
Thus the lean-to became Father’s workshop equipped with a vice and everything needed.
And the space by the wall, where the sloped roof did not allow to stand up in full of your height, became the stable for Uncle Tolik’s ‘Jawa’.

 As a result, our old section in the shed became roomier even with the remains of the long crate planks stacked under its low gable-roof. 
The leaves of the door from the kitchen to the room were taken out of the hutta for the summer season (with the door shut there hardly remained any air for breathing)and put upon the planks under the shade roof.

You’d find a good use for anything when giving it a thought.
A mattress put upon the door leaves turned the shed section into my summer dacha.
The bed-upon-the-door was at the height of the second sleeping bunk in a train car compartment, but wider.
On the nearby wall, Father fixed a sliding lamp with a tin shade and I could read at night as long as I chose. 
I also equipped my dacha with a small radio receiver ‘Meridian’.
It was given to Father by a customer grateful for the resurrection of his TV. 
The presented receiver, of course, did not work at all, but in a couple of weeks, Father found the necessary spare parts and my place became the second to none. 
You could read whenever you wanted or listen to the radio.
And, most importantly, no one would say ‘turn off the light!’ or ‘enough of that hurdy-gurdy!’

There was I lying alone by the cone of the light over pages in an open book till the midnight and past it.
Only dogs were barking in the yards of huttas of the nearby streets.
One dog would start, another snapped up, then still another continued the chain reaction of barking. 
Though our Zhulka hardly ever took part in their concerts, having grown too old and lazy.

That's interesting what would come if you put together all the dog barking adding even that beyond your hearing? 
For example, the dogs in the Settlement had calmed down and those in Podlipnoye began to bark and so on – over into the next regions and countries.
Then, probably, the dog barking would never subside on the Earth.
And that’s what they call the Planet of Humans, eh?

The best time for turning the receiver on was after the midnight.
Firstly, it's when they broadcast ‘The Concert After the Midnight' in which there was not only Georg Ots but Din Reed too. 
Then, from one to two o'clock: ‘For Those in the Sea’ which meant the sailors of merchant ships and fishing trawlers.
That’s where they put on air real rock’n’roll.
Well, clear enough, the sailors had seen oversea countries, Lyudmila Zykina alone and round the clock would not make them feel happy.
And from about four till almost six, there was jazz. 
Just two-three musicians: a piano, a double bass, and a drummer but what music they made! 
‘And now listen to the sketch ‘The Spring Mood’, please...’, and followed such a number – wow! Best of the best…
Well, at six they put on the hymn of the Soviet Union after which the usual ‘Mayak Radio Station’ poured out its usual hurdy-gurdy till next midnight...

Once I did not sleep all night.
Because at dawn I had to go to the Swamp by bike.
That time I brought hay, a couple of armfuls, from someone else’s haystack for our two rabbits.
The rabbits were given by Scully, he kept a lot of them in four or five cages, and Father told me to provide food for ours.

And then I thought that the day had already begun and what if to find out for how long I could go without sleep.
Somewhere around noon when I was playing chess with Seryoga Chun on their porch of their hatta next to the water pump, I felt that the sounds of talking came to me as if from afar and I didn't understand what exactly they were telling me. 
  
Yet I managed to find the way to my dacha... compartment ... sleeping bunk in ... compartment the

And when I got up it was light around – already or still?
I went to the kitchen in our hutta.
The cuckoo clock on the wall wagged its pendulum and showed five in the afternoon.
In the tear-off calendar stood the following date.
Had I slept more than a day?
Everyone laughed and said:
‘Phew! That’s a champion sleeper!’
Then it turned out that Uncle Tolik suggested to tear off one more page in the calendar while I was sleeping. 
I mean, those rabbits also did not stay with us for long... 

That Sunday I went to the Seim River by bike once again, but already alone.
The familiar road shot past much faster under the spokes, especially since I was traveling quite lightly – Sasha and Natasha were also going to come to the Bay Beach by 2:10 suburban train.
So, they’d bring me something to chew on.

How could I know that from cycling and so much swimming the appetite breaks loose? 
My stomach fell in.
And I could not already bear to see how people on the beach were calling their kids and grown-ups to their blankets on the sand to chew the brought delicacies sitting in a circle.
How long was it to wait yet?
And I pricked my ears up when at different ends of the beach different receivers tuned to the same ‘Mayak Radio Station’ began to announce the same exact time after the sixth sound signal ‘peee!’

At last, 2:10 to Khutor Mikhaylovsky rumbled along the bridge over the Seim.
Some ten minutes later from the first groups of the arrived folks appeared from the pine grove across the vast field.
However, neither in the first wave of newly arrived nor in the subsequent ones my brother and sister did not come.
What the heck?
We had arranged that I would wait for them on the beach.
Oh, I’d wolf a bull down, yes, I would, right away.

Then Sasha Plaksin who lived in the Gogol Street opposite the water pump came up to me. 
Natasha told him to tell me that they would not come because of we were going to the Uncle Vadya’s to celebrate his birthday and I had to come straight there.
‘Is that all? Nothing else?’
‘No.’
Well, that’s also right – why to stuff up your stomach before a birthday party?
And I started back to Konotop with my stomach stuck to my backbone…

The familiar road no longer seemed to be short.
The pedals grew heavy and I did not sprint anymore but strenuously turned them under the cheerless song of the robbers in the movie ‘Morozko': 
    "Oh! How hungry we are!. 
    Oh! How awfully cold!." 

The forest was over, the path along the railway embankment also ended and there still was more than half of the way ahead.
Until then I never really knew what meant ‘I wanna eat’.

When the big billboard ‘Welcome to Konotop!’ appeared at the road bend, I felt that I could go no further and turned into a grassy ditch stretching towards the forest belt.
And along the whole ditch not a single blade of some edible grass that ages ago we showed each other at the Object...
Nothing but sparysh and equally inedible dandelions...
And also those, with the small dry shots...
I pulled at their tops and chewed the softer part of the stem.
No, that was not food…
Okay. Just a little bit of rest in the ditch and the final leg to Uncle Vadya’s home…

I was the very first guest there.
Before that summer day, I always wrinkled my nose at lard and Mother would say: 
‘Would you have a marzipan on a silver platter then?!’
But ever after, I knew there was nothing tastier than a slice of lard on a piece of rye bread.

(...not kosher for someone?
A good news!
The bigger my share...)

In July the three of us, my brother and sister, and I, went to the military-patriotic camp in the town of Shchors.
The cards of admission were offered at our school, almost for free.
I had to put on a pioneer necktie again.

Shchors stood aside from the major railway lines so it took about four hours to get there by a diesel train.
The usual pioneer camp routine awaited us there: the 'dead hour' after the midday meal, occasional walks through the town to the river to bathe near the railway bridge.
Well, at least there was a library there.

Once there happened an unusual day though.
After getting up in the morning only guys came to the camp canteen.
The Senior Pioneer Leader announced that our girls had been kidnapped and after breakfast, we would go to the rescue. 

Well, an old good game for kids – Cossack-Robbers, the search for the captives following the arrows drawn on the sandy forest paths. 
When the forest ended changing into the even rows of a pine plantation, we came to a crossroads.
Where to now? 
We divided into small search parties and scattered in different directions. 

I and two guys went to the right.
The road returned to the forest edge and eventually led to a lonely hut behind a low fence.
Probably, a Forester's dwelling. 
Not a single alive creature in the silent yard, not even a dog. 
Under a tree near the hut, there was an empty coffin on the ground with the lid put aside. 
Well, did you really have a choice under such circumstances if Grandma Martha had read ‘Russian Epics’ to you?
Of course, I lay in the coffin and asked the guys to cover me with the lid, just as the hero Svyatogor asked the younger hero, Ilya of Murom.

They did as requested.
I lay in the narrow darkness (nothing scary at all) filled with a pleasant smell of shavings from the plane.
Then I tried to move the lid off, but it did not yield to my pushes.
Those guys, supposedly, got seated on it from above. 
I did not scream.
Being so well-read, I knew that any scream or shriek would only ring the coffin with an additional iron hoop, like the strikes of Ilya's sword at the coffin that trapped Svyatogor. 
I waited silently a little and then quite easily moved the lid off. 
All was so quiet and empty around.
The guys, probably, felt spooky sitting in a deserted yard on an ominously silent coffin and fled...

When I returned to the crossroads, everyone was already there and the kidnapped girls too because it was time to go back to the camp for the midday meal. 

I did not stay there until the end of the camp shift.
The Senior Pioneer Leader got a telephone call from the Konotop City Komsomol Committee that I had to go to the camp for the training of Komsomol activists in the regional center, the city of Sumy.

On the last evening, before I left, some local Shchorsian guys came to the camp intending to beat me up.
They even showed up in the mutual bedroom windows to communicate with their gestures that I was a dead man already. 
Maybe, I had flashed with an unpalatable retort to one of them when bathing in the river under the bridge or else some of the local girls, who also rested in the camp, had complained to them that I was an arrogant priggish smug.
They did not climb in because of the Pioneer Leader's presence. 

Later she escorted me to the barrack of the squad with my sister and brother to say goodbye before leaving early next morning...

In the training camp for Komsomol activists in Sumy we, four guys from Konotop, lived in a tent with four iron beds and our two compatriot-girls had a bedroom in a long one-story building.
In the camp, there was also the canteen in a separate building and a stage in front of rows of benches surrounded by half-dry cob-webbed pine trees. 
On those benches we sat recording in the block-notes which they had given us some lectures – I am damned if I remember what about. 
Now, in the camp of the Komsomol activists, the tent, where we slovenly lay around upon the cloth blankets, was just a tent with no magic shows of a shadow theater on any of its walls.

(...how much we lose when growing up…)

I was the youngest in the Konotop group.
The elder guys gave out plenty of chin music why ‘Volga’ of the latest make was preferable to ‘Pobeda’, and what was the right way of breaking a motorcycle in, and about a neighbor guy who married at the age of eighteen.
Could you imagine such a moron?
Got married when he still should be playing football with the guys in the yard.

One guy from our tent could play guitar. 
He borrowed it from someone in the long low building.
There were only two songs in his repertoire: one about the city to which you could hardly ever find the way and where people led with their chin when thinking or speaking out and preferred their lovers' hands to the apartments; and the other about skeletons walking in a file after a joint. 
And even with so limited numbers he always had an audience; the guitar strumming attracted guys from the nearby tents and girls from their bedrooms in the long building. 

I asked him to teach me guitar playing. 
He showed me two chords and I used them to train beating the rhythm of „eight“.
Deep furrows from the guitar strings disfigured the fingertips of my left hand. 
It hurt, but I really wanted to learn.

In the CJI game against the team of Sumy we lost, but not in the greeting contest for which I didn't plagiarize a single line from anywhere. 
We performed as aliens who had lost their way. 
    "It was Mars we were going to! 
    Yeah-yeah!
    It is you we've come to! 
    Yeah-yeah!.." 







