~~~ The Ivory Tower ~~~

Instead of a book of short stories by W. M. Maugham in Ukrainian (a single copy of 150 000 published) a weighty parcel firmly sat down on my shelves, dead as a doornail.
My part in the planned project was executed on all the points and that deprived living on of any further goal.

Life still rolled along the rutted track but already aimless and unplanned.
However, if you don’t ask the unnecessary question ‘what for?’, then a Thursday with the bathhouse and its steam room and subsequent two bottles of beer give enough motivation to live another week.
Look at Tibetan monks who rough it without even such stimulants.

In my, not quite Tibetan way of life, obviously lacked carnal pleasures.

I caught myself thinking this thought the evening when coming to 13 Decemberists after work, I cast the usual glance at the herd of shoes randomly crowded around the shoe shelf on the veranda.
The in-depth self-inquiry that followed, brought to the light that my eyes were trying to make out the high-wedge Austrian boots there.
Actually, it was not my fault that made in Austria footwear was so durable and unwilling to wear out from my memory.
Yet, what boots could come to the veranda in summer?
And what might she have come to Konotop for, let alone 13 Decemberists?
Such rhetorical questions helped to make me a laughing stock before myself but could not prevent nightly ejaculations.

In the dead of night, my sleep was interrupted because I threw my head back and dropped it sharply on the wooden armrest above my pillow in the sliding sofa. 
However, the pain and blood from the cut eyebrow did not obscure the fact of my underpants were soaked.
I took them off and used to wipe my loins and threw behind the other armrest by the wallpapered wall, they could sit there till the morning.
I turned on the lamp on the table, returned to the sofa and threw the blanket back.
Hell!
A dark damp patch blotted the landscape of the crimson tablecloth, which had long since lost its fringe and had become a sofa cover.

‘That’s right,’ said I to myself. ‘That’s exactly what you stole it for.’
Then I folded the cover so that the wet of the stain would not be felt and lay down to sleep the night through.

‘They are white spots for me,
The undecipherable black holes…
...and the quest lost its way in tornado-like whirling…
...splashing black seed drops on the white of the sheet...’

And it became hard to ride a tram in rush hours.
I did not mind being squeezed from all sides to resemble a concave diamond from a card pack, but when they press you against a gorgeous thigh of a young woman, that’s grossly unfair.
Damn!
And that's where you'd have a breaker-like erection which both your raincoats were not fit to hide. 
But there’s nowhere to retreat with the passengers pressed in so as two barrel-loads of herring into one.
All there remained for you was just to stand on, looking dejectedly out the window of the running tramcar, like, I have nothing to do with the thing.
But if not yours, then whose?

‘Blessed be the curves and bends
And other twists
In the railway of tramcars,
The accomplices of the sweetest touches,
Quite decent, and accidental almost...’

And all such things bring to sexual starvation, which the scientifically clever folks shortened to the term ‘libido’.
That damned Libido medicine is highly recommended to people of creative professions, like, to steeply raise the quality of their creations. 
But what the fuck was I to do with that f-f.. fabulous Libido?!
I was not Van Gogh, nor Walt Whitman.


That f-f.. faltering libido caught me up not only in public transport, or erotic dreams but even in the workplace. 
Only at work, the creative orgasm could be reached bypassing the stage of physiological erection. 

For instance, at the 100-apartment block finishing works an unfamiliar young plasterer looked very attractive to me.
Even a passing glance was enough to see, that the rural beauty was devoid of any intellectual pursuits, but the purity of the blush, the tempting outlines of her breasts and thighs (discernible even through the deforming spetzovka) disarmed and captured me.
I decided to gush up the Song of Songs of my own using the plasterer as a model.

Normally, the plastering works were started at a construction site after filling expanded clay over the floor slabs.
Expanded clay is a good thermal insulation material, but it crunches underfoot until it is covered with a screed at the subsequent stages of finishing works.
Turning a couple of times to my cautious steps on the expanded clay—I neared the doorway to make the details of the supposed masterpiece more precise—the model asked Trepetilikha who was plastering a jamb in the same room:
‘Maybe this one has stolen my trowel?’
‘Not a chance,’ replied Trepetilikha. ‘This one if even treads on your trowel wouldn’t pilfer it.’

Giving the size of my libido at that time, the new Song of Songs would have easily surpassed Solomon's creation and only the crude suspicion me in stealing saved the world literature from the upcoming reassessment of its values. 

‘From a high cliff, I dropped my libido 
Into the blue sea
And beheld as the blue sea
Drowned in my libido..’

Shucks!
Three stretches in Romny and two divorces did not leave even one chance out of a thousand for developing a serious relationship.
Would you kindly keep yourself in your straitjacket?

But you cannot lace up a blizzard...

Good news it was not whipping my face but pushing from behind towards the station in the early morning twilight.
Dense streams of snow in the squalls of the wind were turning the twilight back into the dark.
Knee-deep in snow drifts I was floundering along the supposed path by the railway track.
The concrete pillars holding the contact wire above the rails served the milestones not to deviate too much.
But it’s better not to look back – the blinding snow would instantly cling to the face.
And there’s nothing behind to look for – it had been and gone.

Just why did I see her naked body in the white churning foam of the madden blizzard?
And she’s not alone – having it with someone.
Not me…

I turned my face back to get slaps from the snow, to wake up and not see.
In my brain I switched on the splashes of the organ from the House of Organ Music, they were piercing and not precise, but distracted… 

Probably, I’m a pervert indeed – even from the love scene between my wife and no one knows who I fall into an erection midst this snowstorm.
What wife?
You do not have a wife!
Okay, not the wife – the love of the lifetime.
Shut up, asshole!
I shake my head in desperation and wander staggering on with a groan.

A hard strike from behind on my left shoulder called to order.
The local train from Nezhin was making its way through the snowstorm to the station.
The trains are always right they don’t have deviations.
Look, the blurred lights ahead, above the fourth platform.
From there in the common crowd to the station square where awaits our Seagull.
Everything’s fine, I’m just like everyone else...

In the late spring evening on the station square, someone had a breakdown. 

Maybe the heart wanted to take a break or something, but the man collapsed onto the asphalt.
However, the ambulance was quick and pulled up by when female ‘ah! oh!’ were still floating above the small crowd around the vacationer.

Going to the railway station through the Loony park, I missed the beginning and only watched the final act – the departing ambulance and dispersing group of people.
However, the pedestal of the Lenin monument was still sending back tiny echoes of ‘ah!' so reconstructing of what had just been there was as easy as adding zero to two. 

Along the alley opening to the square, one of the incident witnesses was thoughtfully nearing me strolling in the counter direction. 
When we get close to each other, she suddenly repeated the rehearsed ‘ah!’, threw up her hands, like in the Swan Lake ballet, and fell on me.
What else could I do?
Naturally, caught on the fall.
By the open armpits.
Then I gentlemanly dragged the half-fainted swan to the bench of green beams in the low wall of the trimmed bushes.

She sat silently with her head hung down, and I gallantly kept the silence going on in the thick shadow of a tree that blocked the light from the lamp in the alley. 
I sat next to her and inaudibly, in my mind, read out to myself on the uselessness of any advances with my pitch black and thoroughly soaked past, especially in the city where everyone knew anyone else.
When the mutual silence became too meddling, she put her hand on my shoulder, said in a weak voice ‘thank you' and left. 

I looked sadly after the light spot of her long cloak, which was moving away along the alley and I thought to myself:
‘Idiot! Couldn't hug the girl around her waist and leave to her the decision whether to put her head on your shoulder or say ‘don't!' and then leave? No? You're so smart and decided for both! Okay! Now stay with your fucking stream of consciousness, with libido and long nights like the princess on a pea!' 

‘Had an encounter with Katya in the park, dear?’
‘What’s the buzz, Natasha?’
‘Come on. Katya’s from our accounts department. She told me herself how she nearly fainted in the Loony and fell on you.’
‘She took me for someone else, or him for me.’
‘Don’t lie!’
‘Some lucky jackass. Katyas are falling on him in the parks!’

On a payday, I got off our Seagull at the bus station and turned into the post office to send 30&30 alimony. 
Then I crossed the Club street back and proceeded alongside the Loony park towards the railway station.
‘Hey! You’re from the Orpheuses, right? Ogoltsoff?

...a young man of my age, together with a woman, his wife, probably, making for the station too…
‘Yes.’
‘Do I know you! You studied in Nezhin and I knew your wife Olga!’

...no, I never met him, and my wife was known not only by him…

He looked around as if he was looking for another rock to knock on my skull with. 
Then he pointed his finger at his companion who stubbornly looked away.
‘See? Have got teeth into and having me in all the holes!' 

...yea, I see it alright, having it in all the holes…
...some antediluvian life, you are wandering around all in suffering and sorrows for the flute of Eera and they still pop up with the news on Olga… 

‘Okay. Say hello to my wife Olga.’
'Damn, you're some... fool driver!’

Leaving them to each other, I turn off the Club street into the park along the path leading to the Loony Palace of Culture, but bypass it to the right and behind the white monument of Lenin I walk diagonally to the side exit from the park, then past school eleven to the terminal of tram 3 by the Under-Overpass.

At the Bazaar stop, Skully and Vladya entered the tramcar.
‘Hi!’ I say. ‘How are you?’
Skully nodded warily and they also said:
‘Hi!’
The rumbling tram was driving us to School 13.
I gave a little chuckle.
‘What are you laughing at, Sehrguey?’ asked Skully with unprecedented correctness.

That’s some news!
For the first time in my life, he called me by my name, escaping my school, or labooh handle. 
Yes, and even with that pompous seriousness, like a lord-speaker addressing a peer from the opposition faction. 
“Ah… Just remembered Vladya’s verse.
Do you remember, Vladya? 
We were writing poems at the lessons.
I composed one where he was blowing the horn and clanging his sword in a battle with another knight.
So he produced an answer:

“But failed your calculations
And no more tries at putting on me
The wreaths of military glory.
As for the bugle, I wasn’t so horny...
I was then cozy and low in the ditch...”

‘Now remember, Vladya?’
He vaguely shrugged his shoulders and looked back and round at the rows of the seated passengers in so apologetic a way, that it was clear at once, he did not keep any memories of the sort.
Not to strain my old bosom friends any longer, I got off by School 13. 

On foot went I along the Nezhin Street, then the Eugenia Bosh street, and took the turn into the Kotovsky street.
My feet knew those streets by heart and I could trust them and, at leisure, think about this or that…

...the translator from ‘Vsesvit’ did a good job rendering the verses of that Chezh… how could it be done in Russian, I wonder?...probably…

‘I walk and smile to myself
And the thought
‘what would the passers-by think of me?’
Makes me laugh out loud...' 

...no, in ‘Vsesvit’ it’s better good fellow the translator but the Chezh is still a better fellow and in general Chezhs are good fellows…
...if we for instance take Jan from the Bolshevik…
...stop! no poking the Bolshevik’s ashes or else we’ll have another turn of plaintive weeping to irrigate with bitter tears the dry and petrified sponge which for a year already kicks back dropped behind the kitchen table…
...but this Chezh is really good he's shown them all how to make a poet's last will… 
...before him they produced just two-liners: ah, bury me so that in spring the nightingale’s song will sound o’er my grave… and me, please, where there the Dniper flow is heard from afar… absolute selfishness and consumerism… go and learn from the laughing Chezh… everything’s instructive and to the point… starting with the tree whose roots will suck the juice from me and pump it up right to the flowering twigs so that bees will collect the honey to grease the buns for young beauties when they drink their tea… that's the chivalry! he even postmortem keeps them on a special diet… I will feed them! says he, with delicacies!.. but it's not the Chezh Republic's fault… schizophrenia is supranational, indestructible and indivisible… although there are defectors, like Freud… they put their vision of the world in service to their own pocket and open a Viennese school… to keep the pot boiling… and with the fall of the curtain, after the life spent among neurasthenic ladies with their hysterics and naphthalenized spiders of scientistical doctors… did you not ask yourself the question looking into the mirror: well, what now, Ziggy, have your poles helped you?.. and you could have remained a normal schizo… free… but what is freedom and where its fore is and where the behind? As Peter Lysoon cares to put it… freedom from what? and here you get fixed up with the national traditions… for the Brit of Shakespeare it's freedom from time… the connection of times is broken describes he an ordinary clinical case… while in Ukrainian the very term denotes separation from God or else can be interpreted as some incognito ‘free divine' yet the existence of both freedom and God is beyond provability… but when feeling that the leash no longer holds – ahead! with frenzied rapture… still watch your step, it's good in the wild yet it's painfully chilly and wet… and here is the whole dirty trick: how to avoid the dictates necessary for keeping the herd safe and simultaneously enjoy the goodies of the in-herd lifestyle with a warm female next to your side and cool vodka from the freezer?.. more complex that the quadrature of the circle… 
what’s that? Decemberists street? so soon? some gag… Mercutio was lucky to have a friend like Romeo who would snap him back to earth in time ‘peace, f-f.. friend of mine, thou talk’st of nothing! look around or you’ll get to the Tsiolkovsky street in no time!”..
...what's that? why is Lenochka strolling in front of the gate?. 

‘Dad, you’ve got a visitor.’
‘What visitor?’
‘I don’t know, he says he’s your friend.'
I tinkled handle-latch of the narrow gate and went into the yard.

On the bench by the porch, looking up at the lower branches from the apple tree serving the backrest too, my visitor sat, aka my friend, blowing cigarette smoke up into the leaves.
‘Hello, Twoic.’
‘Hi, Hooey Pricker.’

He came by the local train from the nearby Bakhmach in the neighboring Chernigov region and had to go back by the last local in Kiev direction.
Before the departure, there was not too much time neither too little and we strolled to the station without hurrying. 
Along the way, we remembered the golden old time, Slavik and Petyunya. 
Twoic, in general terms, outlined their cases for the past period.
With a sad sigh, he admitted that knew that all had gone wrong for me. 

Well, and he meanwhile graduated and, following the appointment, became a Chemistry teacher in the village of Varvarovka, six kilometers from his home.
So an advantageous appointment of my friend did not come as a surprise for me – in the era of deficit Goods Manager of a district trading base (that's his mother's position) had levers more powerful than those of even the secretary of the district party committee. 

In the neighboring village of Varvarovka, at his workplace, everything was drowned in the moonshine and only a remarkable specimen, with genetic resistance to homemade alcohol thanks to Cossack ancestors, would have survived the constant submersion.
The periods between educating the school kids were filled with friendly bouts in Bakhmach with toughs of the district center, and by trips to Nezhin to have it with some of the eager whores in the student hostel. 

Village teachers were exempt from the army draft as well, as persons over twenty-seven-years old.
After reaching the specified age, Twoic realized that it was time for him to grow.

A professor at the Nezhin institute, who was kept fed with deficiencies from Twoic's mother trading base, made protection in some research institute in Kiev. 
Ph.D. student – each letter had its individual halo. 
To get into the graduate school by the research institute, Twoic was prepared to pray all the gods whatsoever.

The Nezhin professor brought his mother to the right person from the research institute and she held the necessary negotiations, but Twoic still went to the Vladimir Cathedral, where he offered a prayer and did not stint for a twenty kilos candle, but now, just in case, he showed up to me.

After all, I was that Hooey Pricker, the Hosty elite, the rising star of the English Department, the bearer of a blessing, like Jacob, like Joseph…

(...the devil only knows what blessedness is, but since Thomas Mann said it is around then, after all, it is…)

It looked like Hooey Pricker had a nasty nose-dive and splashed his blessedness, yet what if a drop or two had not spilled?
Let him sprinkle the remnants on him, Twoic.

About the drops, he did not say a word to me, and everything else, following the point of the giant candle, is grown in the hotbed of my feverish fantasy. 

In the end, Twoic went to his projects in hand and without excessive hesitation laid out his business plan, according to which I did not have anything more to lose while he had a scientific career ahead of him.
It only remained to get through the graduate school.
But, if lucky, there shined a decent jackpot.

In short, one, like, a business guy from Kiev wanted to buy a bag or two of hemp.
Twoic was reluctant to invite the guy to his village – what if he was an operative officer?
It’s better I would sell it in a place convenient for the transaction.

From the friendly offer, I felt somewhat melancholic, sort of. 
For political transgressions they gave forty-five stay in Romny, but how much would they dump for dope?
And they could make you sleepy forever too…
Yet, Twoic talked to the point, I did not have anything to lose as far as my Maugham plan was accomplished.
And I agreed.

On the second platform we exchanged a farewell handshake: let help you, Twoic, my sprinkled drops, if there was anything left.
Do your graduate school, the whole nine yards...

A telegram from Kiev put on the table:

"Saturday 12.30, metro by Railway Station, guys too." 

It was not signed, which meant it was my friend calling me.
My friend Twoic.

Any mail for me went to the shelves, but a telegram was received for the first time, and the text was somewhat conspiratorial.
That’s why they put it under the lamp on the table, for me to see when I’m back from work.
Since I I kept silent as a fish to all questions from my parents, Lenochka was entrusted with clarification.

I delivered answers with the evasiveness of the Delphic Pythias, feeling the growth of tension in the silent kitchen and the adjoining room.
‘You have a telegram.’
‘Very interesting.’
‘Already read it?’
‘What else do they do with telegrams?’
‘From Kiev? Yes?’
‘So it’s written here.’
‘And from whom?’
‘It’s not written here.’
‘Are you going?’
‘Going is not the must if you have a hang glider.’

Why was I showing off and making so much mist in the fog?
I didn't know another way to instill a taste for philosophical dialogues and playing with words. 
How else to reveal to her, a motherless girl, the eternal feminine secret: so that they wouldn't stop courting you, give without giving?

Usually, those word-wandering conversations were cut short by the fierce indignation of the kitchen: 
‘Not tired of the nonsense? Get away from him!' 

She was growing up a clever girl.
And knew how to maneuver, albeit still in naive, childish way.
No wonder though with the good training she'd undergone, especially from three to five when her mother disappeared suddenly and her father was popping up only on weekends to say ‘hi!' and go away to his friends. 
In the weekday evenings the drunk grandpa was snoring behind the wall and grandma, pissed that he had slipped away although at the end of working day they got to the RepBase Checkpoint together, and she had to go alone in overcrowded tramcars and trudge the bags alone along the darkness and snowdrifts of the outskirt streets, would scream at the small girl with threats to give her away, the disgusting wretch, into an orphanage. 
And it seemed to the frightened kid it was not her granny, but Baba-Yaga, the crooked witch, the mistress of the black blizzard which scratched into the ice-clad windows, and all of them were against her defenseless, five-year-old wretch.
Complain? To whom?
Wait for help? Where from?

So Lenochka learned to get along with her grandmother.
She knew when to hug and how to kiss on the cheek.
And granny brought her cakes with cream from ‘Cooking' store by the Under-Overpass.
Yes, and she sewed for her everything with the Singer sewing machine.

And what good things did she see from her dad? 
Coming from work he knew only to rustle with the book pages, and even bought a table lamp.
Well, there were also those thirty rubles a month, yet they were just thirty rubles to granny.
But the Granny insured her with insurance and when she is eighteen – here you are, Lenochka, get two thousand! 
And whatever you asked granny could cook.
She also knew all the gossip about her classmates and they always had something to talk about.

However, when you asked what's happiness, or, say, beauty, then daddy explained more interesting.
And he knew how to praise a new haircut so it’s ticklish with joy.
But all the same, Granny’s better...

My friend Twoic did correct calculations when appointing to meet at 12.30.
By that time the first local train from Konotop reached Kiev.
He did not consider one thing – my disgust to be put in frames worked out not by me.
So I arrived in the Mother of Russian cities two hours earlier, by an express train.

 Leaving the railway station I crossed its square full of tramway traffic clang and rumble and rings, and leisurely strolled along the inclined plane of an empty wide sidewalk towards the busy intersection of the megalopolis.

Half a dozen gypsy woman followed me into the first canteen after the crossing.
Removing my raincoat and hat on the hanger in the corner, I almost regretted the coincidence and that I would have to wait for the group to select their havvage and echoing to each other in their dark language pull their trays to the checkout.
Never mind, there were lots of time.

However, the gypsies took a wait-and-see attitude and, glancing at me, clearly refrained from going first.
And that’s a wise move too – a way to check what items on the menu were edible that day.

‘You’re missing bread.’ grumbled the cashier giving a look at my tray.
‘No need.'
With a shrug, she threw back a couple of beads on her abacus and accepted the worn out ruble.
