
Getting seated, I modestly stared down at the cabbage salad combined with a snack of custard cake.
I diligently tried not to follow the news announcer in his coat and cap, broadcasting from a nearby table, to feed the chewing companion the latest news of his world where the day before someone ate too much of noxiron and kicked the bucket.

The most appropriate dinner gossip.
Yet the most surprising thing that this metropolitan newsmonger word for word repeated the piece which already was no news in the provincial wild.
The crane operator Vitalya shared it a week ago.
Coincidence, or plagiarism?
Having intercepted my pensive look, the announcer swelled in vanity – the owner of a stunning sensation...

In the barber shop on the same street, there was no queue so when I returned to the station there remained half an hour before the appointment.

The shoe cleaner in a satin blue coat polished my shoes flicking the anchors tattooed on the backs of his hands.
Instead of staring at the ladies scurrying past his booth to the women’s toilet and back, I kept my look on the gray of his head bent to my knees.
The mujik got fed up with such an anomaly.
‘What are you gazing at?’ he asked, putting off his brush and taking a plush cloth instead.
‘I seem to like you.’
‘Bullshit.’ he grumbled grimly. ‘Even I don’t like myself.’
‘So we have different tastes.’
And all the same, there still remained fifteen minutes... 

I passed through the immense vestibule of the station, climbed up the white stone stairs to the second floor and up there rested my elbows on the wide white parapet over the grandiose hall that went up into the twilight filled height.
And I watched the messy Brownian movement confusion of the people particles down there on the tiled bottom.
About five minutes later, this tiny bit of me would mix with them, but now I was just looking down at the bustle.

Their hasty streams thinned at the center of the hall, and further on they again became denser.
The reason for the phenomenon was the athletic figure in a scarlet jacket walking in unhurried circles there.
Waiting for someone.
Whom?
Not me.
Nobody waits for me except for Twoic who, probably, right now is circling by the metro station in the waves of the passengers from the neighboring local trains station.

It’s funny.
In the center of the Central Station, this burly guy is spinning waiting for someone, a little lesser guy is circling by the nearby smaller station – Twoic, also in a state of waiting. 
If you extend this line, then somewhere still further, say, on a tram terminal, there is a teenager waiting for somebody.
And so on, just like that endless little man in a fire extinguisher on the staircase landing of the second floor of my kindergarten, the man in a cap who with his somersaulting pictures led me to the notion of infinity.

That kindergarten ‘I’ hadn’t even heard the word ‘infinity’, but infinitely gazed at the fire extinguisher and tried to understand: where did those men in caps go?
That zany kid is me, who replaced him, and I will be replaced by other ‘I’ and all we are finite unlike the little man in his cap...

Near the metro station, I rested my chin in the chest hiding the face beneath the brim of the hat. 
My friend Twoic walked along the line of telephones on the wall, to and fro.
He wore a newly re-established mustache, prestigious leather coat, thinning hair and a little unhappy thoughtfulness on his face.

There he turned and started back.
After catching up with him, I silently followed from behind.
At the end of the phones line he turned again right to my grin:
‘Hi, Twoic. And where are the guys?’
‘Hooey Pricker!’

He tilted his broad face and giggled with the characteristic Twoic's laughter followed by that same tight squint to snap the situation: what, how? 
After a cheerful hug, he let me go and started confused talk about Slavik and Petyunya who wouldn’t come.
From the local trains station, a new wave of fresh arrivals poured along the sidewalk and we backed to the wall. 

Twoic dropped development of shaky hypotheses about the reason for the absence of Chernigov representatives, asked me for a 2-kopeck piece and started spinning the disk of a phone, with an open pocket notebook in his grip.
It's better to have a dull pencil than a sharp memory, as running a KGB wisdom shared by their black-headed gallant. 

The crowd streamed past with their mesh bags, suitcases, packages, boxes, buckets, bundles of pipes, briefcases, backpacks, seedlings, cornices, bags and any other imaginable and unimaginable burdens, they hurried to the metro and to the stops of public transport of all types on the square, dashing casual looks at the pair of metropolitan tough guys. 
The one with the broad leather back spinning the phone disk should be the boss, and the other one with a tenacious gaze from beneath the lowered brim of the hat, a bodyguard.

And although not each one in the crowd knew such words as ‘boss' and ‘bodyguards' yet in the back of the minds they shared mutual respect to those two guys, at least for the fact that their backs were free of burden and they had where to call on the phone in the metropolitan city of Kiev. 
How could they know, the fluid crowd, that Twoic was an upstart in the city, and I was a nothing-at-all called in by his telegram?

And, by the by, where’s he phoning?
I had no idea.
And it did not matter, for I was just an instrument.
There’s always the one deciding everything for us and my business’s just to execute the orders...

Last year Twoic became a graduate student and now was on the straight path to Ph. D.
His scholarship was higher than that of mere students yet not enough for a big city life.

Okay, there were no problems with clothing because his mom controlled a trading base.
The issue of feeding was also solved, coming back from weekend visits to the native village Twoic carried ‘torbas’ tearing off the hands with their weight.
Yet, for all these blessings it was necessary to pay in kind – to tolerate the parental chewing his ear off with twits for a diffused way of life, and work all the weekend-long digging, manuring, hauling, pulling in the garden and about the hutta. 

Twoic had enough of health and strength to make sport of the household works.
And he especially liked carrying something weighty and bulky – armfuls, bundles, sacks with a harvest from the garden to the shed.
Raking muck up in the pig stall or from under the bull calf was not as pleasant yet also a familiar business.
Quoting the old priest from their village: ‘where there's muck, there's lard’.
However, the mom’s moans and lamentations about the Kiev whores who eat off and rob the goof of her sunny would drive furious anyone, even a saint.

That’s why Twoic needed ready money.
And where to get it, that’s the question.
To unload freight train cars as in the student years?
That’s below a graduate student level.

To play Preferans with the hostel neighbors?
The occupation for a more skilled workforce. 
Preferans is pure arithmetic, and Twoic had two years at mathematical special school in his curriculum vitae, and besides, the feel of whether a player was bluffing or had a really good hand. 
And, last but not least in Preferans, Twoic’s appearance of a naive nature boy putting the opponents off track.
However, the hostel was too shallow waters.
You rip them for a fiver once or twice and they start to shy you.
Everybody grows so awfully busy, no time for a pool at all.
But they go on playing between themselves.
Yes, behind the locked door of someone’s room, for a kopeck per a trick.
So mean misers.

However, somewhere, someplace there had to be the upper crust, the elite.
It’s the capital, after all.
Playing by candlelight, on the green cloth, with a freshly opened deck, and so that the trick was no less than fifty kopecks.
But how could you reach the upper crust without money?

So Twoic started to draw romantic plans about getting a jackpot...

The first plan of becoming a drug traffic baron in the cannabis market somehow withered by itself.
It was followed by a plan to make friends with some of the foreigners who flashed through the capital and develop a barter trade with clothes brought from outside the iron curtain. 
That’s when he called me to use as the operating end tool.
And from that time I entered into the service to Twoic on quite acceptable terms if you already don't care the f-f.. flick about anything at all. 

Prospective business with foreigners did not prosper either.

On the day of the attempt at the establishing a suitable acquaintance, on the Khreschatyk sidewalks sounded only Roman languages.
It was no use to approach such passers-by with my English of Nezhin make.
Two times Twoic hallooed me at different twos of Negroes in broad-brimmed hats. 
However, the targets in response to my cheerful ‘hi! let’s have a talk!’ shied, for some reason, and kept silent.
Probably, they had already experienced invitations ‘to go out for a talk’ at some Dance Floors.
I had to explain to my boss that they were Negroes from some of the former French colonies so English did not click with them. 

The futile hunt seemed to wear Twoic out, or maybe he decided to thick over some new plan, but my boss sat tightly on a bench in the University greens and allocated me two hours for the uncontrolled free search.

The task was not too attractive but I had to work off the grub, both consumed that morning (buns and Pepsi) and upcoming.
And, leaving him thoughtful on the bench, I did not shirk my duty in any way and kept the ears pricked up – would anyone utter a thing in Shakespearean parlance from any side?

On the Shevchenko Boulevard a group of neat men, passing the Vladimir Cathedral, referred to it as ‘cathedral’.
Might it be?. 
‘No,’ one of them explained in Russian, ‘we are speaking in Latvian.’

I felt fed up.
Okay, one more last try at ‘The Intourist' hotel and that's it. 

On the wide porch in front of the glass entrance, a big guy with a saxophone string on his neck asked politely what I needed. 
Some naive bulldog at the establishment.
How could I – a foreign tourist – possibly knew all those local dialects?
On an indulgent survey of the two-meter aboriginal, I without a word of comment went inside and turned to the left where the bar was. 

The inscription in English asked to pay in local currency only and notified that the current day of the week was a day off. 
Yes, it’s time to have a rest.
The massive-looking chairs by polished tables turned out very responsive and tremendously comfortable. 
Loyalty is rewarded, had I been shirking I wouldn't enjoy such a soft seat. 
Much better than the hard bench planks under Twoic.

At the far end of the bar, which was enjoying its day off, there loosely sat twelve she-apostles and their black-bearded Teacher with his fervent sermon of the truest truth.
What’s their language, by the by?
They should know better.
To Twoic I’d report coming across a delegation of Romanian poultry farmers.

At the next but one table from me, two German-like colorless girls exchange brief clues over their table, strenuously not looking in my direction.
Damn the f-f.. fundamental language barrier.
The chicks were clearly bored. 
It would be the manna for them to hear:
‘You’re cute and I’m cool and I have a friend named Twoic. Let’s kill the boredom in a party of four.’
But they wouldn’t hear that.
The language prison.
They’re locked up in their cell, and I in mine.
We don’t even look at each other as wise foxes ignoring unattainable grapes.
But they can chat at least among themselves, and I? 
Would I remain deaf and dumb?
‘An o’fooly nais plais,’ informed I them socially. ‘Ain’t it? Baat (with a slight sigh of disappointment) nahbady to have a tauk wid!’
Gallantly I nodded at their amazed gazes.
‘Bye-bye!’...

For the period elapsed since that time, the jackpot hadn’t turned up, yet Twoic liked to deal with me.
I was all ready, like a young pioneer, for anything and besides, I was a relic of his student life. 
So, after the first, the similarly brief telegrams followed – the name of the village and the date for me to come on a weekend.
It took half an hour to get from Konotop to Bakhmach by a local train, and then ten minutes by bus. 

‘What's the news about you each weekend getting on a train with flowers? Visiting you wife or what? But you're, like, divorced.' 
‘To visit a friend in the village. The flowers are for his mom and grandmother.’
‘And there are no flowers in the village?’

There were.
Yet much more than flowers there was work in the village.
For my arrival, a roof was there waiting, or the barn, or turning dirt in the garden. 
After the work, of course, moonshine – as much as you like and gobble up to your heart content.
However, without the flowers I’d be like a farmhand there and when with them I was a guest, sort of...

The Twoic's parental house stood on the village outskirts in a narrow lane named the Shore. 
The lane narrowness was not resulting from its layout but the density of fruit trees overhanging the fences. 
The house, of course, was called hutta, but in terms of quality, it was still a house. 
Between the gates and the hutta, behind a low palisade to the left, there was a well with water at just two-meter depth.
A pail chained to the winch with a tin roof above. 

On the right, there was the whitewashed brick wall of the building comprising anything – a summer kitchen, whose porch almost closed with the steps of the high porch to hutta's veranda, a garage for a car that still had to be bought, a tool store, a shed. 
However, the entrance to the barn was not from the yard but from the back of that building.

Passing between the two porches, you found yourself in the backyard with one more, wooden shed for goats, chickens, pigs, and anything else. 
Under the windows of the hutta there grew raspberry and then half a dozen of apple trees and still further the huge vegetable garden beyond which there stretched an even field to the distanced forest belt hiding the railway.
The collective farm did not use that field because of abnormally high subsoil moisture.
The folks on the Shore lived in a big way.

The house was headed by Raisa Alexandrovna, Twoic's mother, because of her husband, Sehrguey, for the most part, was busy with the housework and he was not up to chatter. 
Of course, if something really put his back up he could address his wife with a loud appeal to shut her yap up.
Then Raisa Alexandrovna would pause, bite her lower lip and act a dumb rural woman, but all that was a pure theatricality – in five minutes the phone on the veranda would ring up and they ask for Raisa, and not Sehrguey. 

Apart from domestic affairs, she ran the local politics, accepting several visitors a day, both on and without an appointment. 
Her favorite scenic image was that of a ragged woman all in troubles and worries, in a worn out jacket and her kerchief on the black hair and only the irony in the look of black eyes could hardly fit the disguise.

She knew how to artfully tie her kerchief, re-arranging its appearance several times a day.
The knot changed its position from the forehead to under the back of her head, to sometimes on the side—a gypsy style—depending on whom Raisa Alexandrovna was accepting.
For the current visitor (in his jeans, long hair and the beard like a hippie from Los Angeles) she unexpectedly got it tied under her chin.
Then Twoic said it was the young priest in their village.

The hippie priest left and in half an hour a Zhigulie car pulled by the gate and a young but very loud woman, who very much needed ‘a gown, eh?’, entered the yard.

Raisa Alexandrovna took her to the veranda and was humbly making her brains for at least forty minutes before sending away with a promise of ‘a gown, eh?'. 
She did not sell things at home, to accomplish the transaction the visitor had to visit the trade base if the negotiations had a happy end.

Raisa winked at us with Twoic after the retiring priest's wife, blithe Mother, and crossed her face with a thumb. 
Holy, holy, holy!
But then she decided that we had spent too much time playing cards on the porch stair and ordered us back to the garden to turn the dirt, or spread the muck, hauling it there in the pull-cart with its wheels getting stuck in the black soil, or to collect the corn ears...

However, when I and Twoic were erecting another barn of logs we were out of her jurisdiction – Sehrguey had announced a smoke break that’s why we were playing.

The food after work was not a havvage but a good rural grub on lavish fat, with dill aroma and light steaming above the plates and a bunch of crispy green onion on a dish, in fresh water drops.

The chef cook in the hutta was Grandma Ulya.
She cooked delicious things even with her one hand.
The other, long paralyzed, she kept in the pocket on the stomach of her apron.
She also was responsible for the moonshine distilling.
She liked watching the product’s drops dripping into the vessel set under...

I liked that kind of life more than laying on the Seim beach.
I liked the energetic one-legged neighbor Vityuk, the master of the game of the throw-in durak.
And even more, I liked Ganya, Raisa Alexandrovna's sister. 
There was no acting or irony in her.
She was calm and attentive and she understood everything.
I was sorry that she had cancer.
Doctors recently cut a ‘pea’ out and when she returned home her husband did not give her no peace until she showed him the fresh gash from the surgical knife.

I knew that she would not survive because when renovating the stove in her hutta all of the old firebricks turned out to be quite rotten. 
I was told to use the bricks again all the same – there was no other, but I could see that it was not for long...

They buried her in my absence, with heart-rending lamentations.
When they were taking Raisa from the cemetery, the rural old women shouted at her and other mourners:
‘So what? Cried out Ganya back? Returned?’

Twoic was very indignant telling me about such cruel brutality, but in my opinion, that was an ancient psychotherapy and one of the rituals in the continuous comedy of life...

In my next visit, the husband of the deceased was also sitting in the yard under the mulberry tree. 
At first, I did not guess where the sounds were coming from.
I thought a puppy entered the yard, but it turned out the widower burst into tears.
Such a burly man, a bus driver.
The tears flowed and he did not try to hide them.
If they all together could not call her back, what's the chance of you doing it single-handed?.

Ganya’s son, a guy about fourteen, was at war with Twoic because he fell in love with Twoic’s wife, but Twoic had divorced her.
Offended, sort of.
For me, it was a complete news that he got married and divorced. 
But Twoic said, yes, a Jewish girl from the Biology Department.

He also told that his father-in-law, when visiting people after vodka grabbed lard for a snack, sort of demonstrate that he was not from kosher holders.
Now the ex-father-in-law would raise Twoic's son as he pleased up to the making of him an Orthodox Jew under the most Ukrainian last name of all. 
And Twoic sighed at it.

Raisa Alexandrovna did not allow time for Twoic to grieve, though, and shouted from the phone in the veranda that he had to change into clean clothes because they were bringing an aspirant bride for the ‘evaluating look'. 
The loving mother did her best to find him a good party from among local girls which periodically were brought to the Shore.
Otherwise, the Kiev whores would bamboozle that zany of Twoic. 

He said inaudible ‘fuck!’ and went to change.
Soon behind the gates, a car was heard and a pair of parents led into the hutta their elegantly donned girl. 

I stayed alone on the porch of the summer kitchen, but then a visitor joined me.
Some old man bent literally into an arc.
When standing, he couldn’t see the face of a man before him, only up to the waist.

We started a slow talk and the old man confessed to me that he was once a young and well-proportioned rural clerk, sporting a military tunic and high boots.
The collectivization began and with the clerk's assistance, they were making lists of those to be exiled to the Siberia. 
Now he was not able to look into eyes of people around him.
And, after all, all was to no purpose.
The grandsons of the misers who at that time obtained the keys and seals of the village council were now penniless drunks, and the descendants of the robbed and exiled had returned from the Siberia and got prosperous again. 
Because on such a land only a lazy fool lives poorly.

He never waited till Raisa showed up and left, leaning on two short sticks, gazing at the sand of the road.

(...it turns out that the theft of a crimson tablecloth is not the worst thing that can happen to you, there are things for which you punish yourself more ruthlessly…) 

Then Sehrguey came up with a major project of paneling the hutta base with bricks. 
He had prepared them for several years already.
It took me three-weekend visits, as the hutta was not a small one.
Twoic was responsible for preparing the mortar and carrying the bricks.
We finished on a Saturday.
On Sunday morning I got up first and went out on the veranda porch.
My shoes stood on the second step with their noses directed towards the gate, although in the evening I left them exactly the opposite.

(...some signs I can read easily – ‘the Moor had done his job...’...)

I put my shoes on, walked out of the gate and, going to the end of the lane, turned to the forest belt because in its clearings a very slow freight train was clanging along. 
I strode fast and then ran and managed to jump on the brake platform of the rear car.

(...everything turns out as it should when you have read it right…) 

The freight train picked up speed and passed Bakhmach without stopping.
People at the railway station looked in surprise after it.
I was standing on the brake platform, happy and pleased with myself, and the wind was ruffling my hair, sort of a tramp by Jack London...

In the winter there were no works in the village and Twoic sent me a telegram only in April. 
We were turning dirt in the garden when his father brought the news about the Chernobyl explosion. 
The day was cold and windy, the gray clouds flew low.
Twoic started to talk about radiation but I did not care the fuck.
What’s the difference?
However, the wind blew from the east and it did not let the radiation to reach the village.
The clouds took it and carried as far as Scotland, to the laundry hung there on linen ropes.
Of course, the Scots then threw away that wash, so ‘Morning Star’...

But all that would happen later, and presently Twoic, leaning against the wall by the phone dialed the number and I gazed at the endlessly hurrying crowd which had no idea about the subtlety of relation between mafia bosses and their bodyguards.
And I tried to figure it out who of us was more interested in this friendship?
The would-be Ph.D. Twoic, or I, his genie from a bottle? 

It’s a dumb thing to do psychoanalysis having no idea how it is done...

In the pedagogical institute, they, of course, explained that it was some malicious insolent invention of the decaying West, degrading and belying capitalized Man which sounded proudly.
A sad pity, the lecturers did not share the essence and methods of that indecency.
So they left us with no other option but to invent the content for the headline ‘Psychoanalysis’ and make out the methods by ourselves.

Swing your arm, push your shoulder against it – we will start this bitch of a collider manually!

(...let’s say, the essence of the analysis is to answer the dirtiest of all questions – that of ‘why?’…)

So, why am I stuck with Twoic? 
What is the reason?
The healthy village food performed by his grandmother?
Absolutely, yes.
Carrying the flowers on a train, I look forward to enjoying the meals.

Besides, there is one more bait which I try to reach with no chance of getting it, like the ass of Till Eulenspiegel.
For any ass, you can find a kind of grass he will run after like a good little boy. 
So which one am I after?

The wild descriptions of sex feasts generously shared by Twoic keep glowing the embers of hope that I, the loyal servant, will get some crumbs off the master’s bed.
Say, some slut girlfriend of another whore.
The desire still remains unfulfilled but who's ever said the ass should ever reach the grass? 

It’s a smart ass and he doesn’t give even a sidelong glance at the bunch of grass dangling in front of his nose.
He pretends not seeing it even point-blank, and he trots after it just so, for the sake of warm-up, because he adores physical exercises and other agricultural work.
However, to see what an ass is up to you don’t need to be as wise as Solomon...

Actually, there was an attempt in tune with ‘girlfriend’s girlfriend’.

They came from Nezhin to Bakhmach, the ex-lover of Twoic and her girlfriend.
Twoic and I met them and took to the village by bus.
Two mattresses were spread in advance over the dry hay in the loft above the summer kitchen.

Out of delicacy, Twoic took his ex-lover to the nearby grove leaving the whole loft for my free use.
The chick was appetizing – slender and busty but she undressed only down to pantyhose. 
No doubt, a pretty looking item, that black mesh on her legs, but what the fuck I needed that mesh for?
The old acquaintance of a dirty trick – welcome on top, no horsing with the chastity belt.

I did not try at tearing the pantyhose to shreds, and all attempts at stirring up a reciprocal flame of passion in her fell flat.
The stalemate was sustained until Twoic brought back his ex-lover from the walk to the grove... 

The next morning I got up first and went for a swim in ‘kopanka’ – a pond of about fifteen meters, dug in the field by an excavator.
When I returned, Raisa Alexandrovna was sitting on the veranda porch.
‘So how was the water?’ asked she with the hint in her squinting black eyes.
‘Cold,’ answered I in all the senses.

After breakfast, already without Raisa, Twoic asked directly:
‘Well, how?’
‘No hows. We’re incompatible.’
‘How that?’
‘She wanted being raped, I wanted to get a shared pleasure. The things just did not click.’

So, all that keeps me on Twoic’s leash boils down to the needs of my stomach, and that of the reproductive organ and… and?.
We need something else here, thinking in just two dimensions is somehow not quite a Hegelian way… 
Where is the third?! Speak!.
Aha! Here it is – the brain.

The brain with its spiritual needs.
It needs so badly to pour out the knowledge stuffed inside. 
In order not to burst in all directions.
It’s such a torment – to have pearls and no one to spill them in front of.

(...who would refuse to assume the role of a Mentor?
Passing the pearls of wisdom to a naively gaping youth…)
