
Twoic presents me with such opportunity by his questions.
How to choose the right trail in the jungle of a research institute laboratory squabbles where each spider is for himself and the jar is one for all?
Who’s more useful for a scientific career – a talented but alcoholic micro-chief, aka the manager of the laboratory, or as dull as a felt boot yet macro-chief, aka the head of the institute department?
Whose servant to become?

Answering these and similar questions, I was amazed at the vast reserves of my Machiavellianism. 
I wouldn’t ever dream of so huge resources, communication with Twoic helped to discover this my side.

However, the essence of my maxims is so simple that Twoic senses it himself and follows in a natural way.
It’s only he can’t put it to words, that we come to this world when everything is occupied already – ‘the house’s sold out!’ – which makes our goal snatching a place under the sun for our dearest selves, and the end justifies the means...

Twoic is all too happy to agree.
But what about me?
Do I live by this sermon?
Do I follow it, do I eat it out?

(...and following your own theories is not the must.
Nietzsche, the inventor of the superman in the form of a ‘blond beast’, was himself a physically miserable nuisance.
‘Snap a place under the sun for yourself,’ teach I, that’s true.
However, as for me, I’d rather go away in search of another sun than mix into their scrambling crowd…)

So, are you happy with your self-psychoanalyzing?
Got all the nooks turned inside out?
Don’t be shy, we are alone – Twoic’s too busy with dialing and checking his notebook.
So, is that it?
The orgies for your stomach, the looking forward to getting a second-hand whore, and the tickling of your vanity by spilling intellectual pearls?
Am I with him because of these reasons?

Well, that’s why, yes…
And also because of the feeling of freedom, when I break to all that out from the routine of my ordered, polished, trampled way of life with a bath on Thursdays, washing on Mondays, ironing on Tuesdays, with the beach or reading room on weekends and the ever-present feeling of shortage and emptiness, and constant being on alert… 

I see, now you flashed with your love for freedom.
Wow, well done! 
And that’s, hopefully, all now?

Of course, yes, is all that not enough for a friendship? 

Don’t try to cheat the dialectics.
You forgot the opposite force – hatred.

And why should I hate him?
He feeds me, provides drinking, presents an outlet to escape…

And add the opportunity to practice in masochism, eh?
What is bliss if not sweet pain?

...had he slept with her or not?.. everything in me contracts into a tight tangle then painfully-sweetly dissolves in whining: it cannot be.. but if?. and again the pain followed by spreading warmth: no, no... 

In one of my first visits to the Twoic's village, on a late windy night, we were sitting at a bus stop on an empty wide square. 
The whitewashed walls of the stop and planks of the benches were stamped with inscriptions and cuts of all kinds of Deep Purples, Dynamos, Svetas, Blitzes, Vovas, and lots of dates. 
Twoic suddenly spoke of Eera.
‘She said she never had it with anyone better than with you.’
The compliment, sort of, scalped me.

They do not come up with such confessions at the table in a cafe.
For such a topic, you should lie together in one bed after having a sex.
Did she count on Twoic someday would deliver these words to me and I recreate the whole picture?
Or out of feline inclination of females to scratch the fucker?
That’s why he reached out to take a cigarette of Belomor-Canal…

Don't succumb to complexes, Twoic, I've never been a sexual giant. 

He somehow felt that he had blurted out a bit too much and, to efface it, started swearing that he had never in his life had anything with Eera…
As if I asked him if it was so.

(...as you pretend to be a stupid ass for too long then at times you become it…) 

‘Did you ever beat her?’ asked he a little later.
Oops, so she shared about that slap too.

‘I hit just once, at the final date,’ reported I, ‘but quite lightly, solely for compliance with the protocol.’
Twoic laughed with his trademark laughter...

The next morning we went for a swim in ‘kopanka’.
I did not want to go in the water, so I walked around the pond and lay on the beach.  
Twoic swam it from end to end.
Some bluish satisfaction was melting in his blue eyes when he came ashore beside me with water trickles dripping from his trunks.
‘This look was in his eyes when getting off her,’ thought I.
The thought brought the pain. 
Less, then I expected, more, than I would like...

She approached me on the beach and started talking about ‘Morning Star’ that lay on the sand next to the pink blanket on which I was sitting.

Did I really read it or that's such a bait for girls? 
What was written in, say, this article?

I had to tell her that it was about a 19-year-old boy, a member of the smugglers' family...

They regularly flew from Pakistan to England, after swallowing a heap of small cellophane packages with drugs.
Stomach was an ideal storage cell, no trained dogs at airports could sniff anything out.
Upon arrival at a safe house in London, the whole family underwent the stomach lavage and –rah-rah-rah!—another batch was delivered.
The fizzle happened during the flight when one of the small packages burst in the stomach of the young man.
They used to tamp too much into a package and the guy was taken from the airport straight to the hospital with a severe overdose.
They washed the drugs out of his stomach and saved his life.
And that was the end of the family business.
Some sad, in general, a story.

She sympathized and shared that she was also a nurse.
A good profession, actually, for a girl about thirty.
She did not look like a movie star, yet everything else was in place.
My trunks could witness for that.
When finishing the story I had to pull my knees up to my chin so as to go on sitting like a civilized gentleman and not a heated gorilla in the zoo. 

And then everything went on like in a fairy tale, she told me her address in the At-Seven-Winds and we agreed that on Tuesday I come to her with a visit of friendship and mutual understanding. 
She went away along the sandy beach, and I had to stretch out on my stomach so as not to attract the public attention with my swimming trunks sticking out on the occasion of the promised Tuesday.

The day came at last and after work, I drove from the station square to the city center. 
In ‘The Flowers’ shop there was nothing to my liking.
I had to buy some kind of a cross between daisies and sunflower. 

There still was a lot of time until the appointed hour and I walked back to the station and then along the Club street to the At-Seven-Winds.
In the Zelenchuk area Vladimir Gavkalov, a driver of a truck crane from the SMP-615, who looked like Eera’s brother Igor, crossed my path.
‘Sehryoga!’ yelled he on the run, ‘You lost your way! The bathhouse is in the opposite direction!’
I did not like the bouquet myself but still continued to carry it. 

Up to the At-Seven-Winds I, all the same, reached half an hour ahead of the schedule and decided to fulfill my long-standing promise to myself that someday I come on a visit to that family of birches in the vast area of construction sites. 
Following the trail trod in the tall grass, I approached the group of the white-trunk beauties. 

Bitches!
The tenants from the nearest street had arranged a garbage dump under the trees.

The sun clenched between the clouds went down without a sunset.
In frustrated feelings, I carried my stupid bouquet to the address.

‘Oh!’ she said. ‘With flowers!’
And I got it at once it should have been vodka.
Then we chattered about nothing in the kitchen of her one-room flat. 
After tea there happened an incident – the big jar of strawberry jam slipped from her hands and slammed to the floor. 
It took her a long time to collect the large sticky puddle and wash the floor.

At about eleven she started sending me home.
I had to drive a fool that there everything was already locked and latched and the wolfhounds set free to run around.
She, like, took pity and yielded me half of her double bed on the condition that I would behave.

When she put the light out and lay down too, I attempted to continue the relationship in the most natural way but met a stubborn resistance. 
I will never learn nothing!
Did she invite me to demonstrate her chastity?

I stopped trying and felt I didn't really care, just like with that sealed post package on my bookshelves.

Or maybe she was shocked by the loss of jam.
A three-liter jar would have seen her through half a winter. 
Probably, an ominous sign for the superstitious.

And I do not care that they’ve arranged that dump there.
When from the consequential construction site, I watched them waving at me, it became somewhat better.
Like a promise of something beautiful.
When they cut them down and replace with a five-story block, they will still wave to me their reedy tops through the heat haze.
That will stay with me, and the garbage heap will remain to those smarties...

In the middle of the night, I woke up because of cautious fingers feeling my dick through the underpants. 
The nurse, who did not get raped, was checking why so. 
She’d better ask the sand on the Seim beach.
But those frisking fingers of strangers checking my flesh…
It had already been somewhere…
Only I couldn’t remember where and when and I fell asleep again.

In the morning I left, omitting the proposed tea with sugar.
What was her name?
Well, er, perhaps, somehow like, maybe.. m-m-m... yes.

The dance floor in the city Central Park was all still left to me.
Actually, I visited it not as a belated shooter in search of the game but simply to get blues. 
A session of nostalgia at a price of 50 kopecks.

I was one of the first to enter the fenced circle of the dance floor and sat down on the beams of the bench running along the high fence of pipes in peeling paint.
The large black boxes of the loudspeakers on the stage raged with good records.
The ‘live’ music had sunk into the past.
Between the numbers one, so to speak, DJ switched the mike on and announced what had just been played and what was coming next.
Sometimes, he tried to make a ridiculous joke.
Fortunately, not too often.

I sat quietly resting the back of my head against the iron pipe of the fence.
The evening twilight was thickening around but high in the sky the flocks of swallows still fluttered under the clouds touched with the parting sun rays.
Just like on the day when you turned one month old and we brought you for a checkup in the children’s polyclinic in the carriage covered with tulle to threw the evil eye off.
Only those swallows kept chirping shrilly when circling above the roof of the department store, and the swallows under the fading clouds were not heard because of being too high.
Then the sky became dark, the night came, and I still sat on the bench and never danced, because of I knew my place.
It was among other thirty-and-over-years old, outside, under the lamp in a park alley.
You could stop there for several minutes to watch the jumping next generation and go back to your life with a sofa in front of the TV.

I sat quietly like a foreign particle, listened to music and watched point-blank the young stock mass getting denser in front of the bench.
That girl’s neck’s longer than Nephertiti’s.
Very nice.
Like a dandelion's stem.
And I admired it without getting aroused.
She did not show up for a couple of weekends and when she came with a guiltily drooping and seemingly shortened neck, I knew that she got cut off at the entrance examinations to an institute.

At eleven, in the general crowd, I left the park for the tram stop by the Peace Square.
Those who lived closer diverged from the stream in pairs and companies.
People who lived in far away city parts discussed: to wait or not to wait? 
Trams at that time of day were an avis rara.

Once at the stop, we were met by a glass-eyed mujik of about forty. 
He was boring the approaching youngsters with a scornful stare, resting his palms on his buttocks, in the pose of a Nazi officer at the gate to the death camp, over which the inscription ‘Forget all hope you who come in here’.
The scared pairs and small companies circumvent him and timidly crowded on the other half of the long stop.
He victoriously triumphed in the conquered living space.

I stopped in front of him, barely two meters away.
So, Sturmbahnfuhrer, a duel of attitudes, eh?

Mine came all of itself, from the newsreels of the Victory Parade in Moscow, 1945.
There, besides the dumping fascist banners to the Lenin Mausoleum, are footages of filmed civilians.
Girls for the most part, with so sad faces.
Almost all of those girls from the past have the same pose, with their left arm let hang along the body they bend the right one across the stomach to grip with its hand the inside of the left elbow.

I repeated the pose standing against the glass-eyed.
Only my right was clutching higher than by the sad girls: around my left biceps.
As the result, the hanging down left arm already looked like a trunk, sort of.
The opponent was not fit to withstand even one minute.
He sadly dropped his head, clasped his hands behind in the zek grip and started to walk in small steps across the width of the stop, as far as the walls of the invisible cell let him go.

The young people were amazed at the ease of my victory over the cockroach and they began to fill the whole stop, taking note, for the future, that know-how is power.
In fact, my deed was a pure improvisation, a gift from my generation to theirs...

Over and over again, as always, with clattering wheels and shallow swaying, the local train carries me away from Konotop…
But where, by the way, am I going?
Taking into account the ink darkness outside the window, no further than to Nezhin. 
So on a visit to Zhomnir.
My reflection, blurred in the double-glazed window, dimly nods in time with the rhythm of the tapping at the rail joints: yea-to-him-and-no-where-else…
Why do I go there?
Well, probably, there is some reason… 
To type with his typewriter another story, or maybe a couple of verses…

(...how can I now recollect from such a distance?..)

But all that's a sheer smoke screen, and no use to tell lies to oneself. 
In fact, I am going to, again and again, feel the aching longing for the lost irreversibly. 
I am going to torture myself on the bank of the invisible river, the same very river which an eternity ago splashed a trickle where I loved and was loved in response… 

That's why the train rumbles along, through the night, and in one of the cars I am sitting on the edge of the three-person seat, with my briefcase in the middle of it basking impudently. 
It's a rare occasion when the car is empty. 
Well, or almost empty.

About twenty meters from my place in a seat on the same side from the aisle a girl is sitting.
She rides backward with her face to me, resting her head against the black window glass. 
At such a distance I cannot make out the features of her face, it’s just a girl, alone in an empty car of a night train with the bob haircut of blond hair.

She does not care about my presence.
She looks quietly through the window, where the picture of nocturnal darkness is sweeping past behind the dim reflection of the lamps in the ceiling of the empty car. 
Of course, it is empty.
I am of no account, I sit quietly in the distance and do not stare at her at all.
My absent gaze is directed along the passage into the empty car vestibule behind the glass of the sliding door, trembling and quaking.
Which, of course, doesn’t prevent a sentimental corner of my eye from catching the outline of her blond head and the part of her shoulder visible above the set of the seat backs separating us.

Just two in an empty car rushing through the night…
But—lo!—she wakes up from her sad stupor.
The right hand touches the hair of her blond haircut.
She turns a bit deeper to the window, demonstrating her profile and then looks straight ahead with her face turned to me.
I can’t see from my place where exactly her eyes are directed, but I don’t need anymore to show interest in the empty vestibule.
Now I look at her and admire, with platonic frankness, the face turned to my side and her shoulders covered with a cloth of the cloak.
That’s all I can do; I will not let her down with too daring jokes or suggestions, like:
‘You’re cute, I’m cool, be my third wife...’
But – ah! – she’s nice!
Even at this remote semi-discernibility…

The clatter of the wheels fades into the background, the beautiful melody by Tariverdiev from the film ‘17 Moments of Spring’ replaces the noise.
It’s when the secret agent Isaev, aka Stirlitz, has a meeting with his wife, arranged by the Center at an inconspicuous cafe in Germany.
She sat down three tables away from him so that he could admire her after ten years of separation. 
How’s she in the already unknown to him USSR?
But he swept away all the unnecessary in that moment thoughts and looked stealthily, inconspicuously, at the new features of the almost half-familiar woman.
More!
Oh, more!
No.
The escorting her another Soviet secret agent sitting by her side looks at his watch. 
The meeting is over.
He takes her away so that the bloodhounds of the Gestapo won't be able to run them down… 

But here, in the car, Tariverdiev's melody does not abate, we are out of their control, alone... 

BRENNGG! ZPRTYCH !!

From among the leatherette backrests between us, like from a slightly sloped deck of cards, a red joker jumps out.
We were not alone!
That drunk has been sleeping between us all along!
His swollen with hangover red mug semaphores:
‘The remote flirtation is over!’

Oh, gods! How I was rolling in the aisles!
Without restraint and stops.

The wretch with a cloudy misunderstanding watched my convulsions, looked back at the girl and walked unsteadily to the vestibule, and then to the next car.
His delicate nature revolted against traveling in the car with screaming horses. 

Do you are right, drunk!
To each his own.
And it’s high time for me to wipe the slobber from ruminating the same mawkish bubble gum…

When Brezhnev died he was buried in an ugly way.
Two mujiks in black mourning armbands simply dropped the box into the hole by the Kremlin wall.
Who watched the ceremony in the broadcast, without cuts for the news program ‘Time’ were just shocked.

The death of Lyonya with his smacking when talking, love for gaudy orders and triple kisses, became a test for the Soviet population.
For almost twenty years, people got used to life if poor and full of shortages, but without Stalin’s mass repressions, and without the shooting of hunger riots by military units as under Khrushchev...

Coming out of the bathhouse late Thursday evening, I personally saw how confused were people, collecting in more dense crowds and looking around for a shepherd.
I recollected the documentaries where big men in officers shoulder straps burst to pieces in weeping fits on the death of Stalin.

And at 13 Decemberists, sort of for fun but with underlying fear they constructed a paper wall to ward off the upcoming unknown.
The material used was all kinds of scrolls of honor awarded to the family members throughout its existence. 
They were picked up in a row, one by another, along the wood slat that kept in place the oilcloth substituting tile paneling on the kitchen wall. 
I would never imagine there was such a plenty of those certificates.
Starting from the sideboard next to the window they hang up to the washstand by the door to the veranda.
The scrolls of honor received for excellent studying in the third grade, for the second place in the pioneer camp draft tournament, for taking part in amateur performances were serving now a breastwork against the future.
I only shrugged.
What’s the difference?

After Brezhnev there followed the leapfrog of mummies, which came to power for three or four months and the population had again to switch off their TVs for three days because there was nothing on except for stiff quartets of chamber music and the news program ‘Time’ reading out telegrams of condolence from fraternal parties and international leaders.
That’s what mourning is for.

But now, after another funeral, a certain Gorbachev got to the steering wheel, quite a middle-aged, to cut the spree of classical music on TV, although with a suspicious stain over his bald head. 
He began to make speeches about acceleration and reconstruction, with Ukrainian pronunciation of the sound ‘g’.
Well, let him talk if so is his pleasure, who cares? 

However, the year before the moment reached in this my letter to you, he issued a decree with a long title, and, in short, introduced the Prohibition, aka ‘dry law’.
That move showed immediately that he never read John Mill in his life.
There it stands black on white, that only those governments resort to the like measures who consider their own people to be juvenile sillies.
That’s like push the latch on the door and say:
‘You’re not going anywhere today.’
