
That was more than I would bear and on the day of the Prohibition coming into force, I got off our Seagull by the grocery store in the At-Seven-Winds.
There I bought a bottle of wine and drank it from the neck without getting out to the street. 
That’s how I expressed indignation with the ‘dry law’.

Some of the saleswomen began to squeak that I should be grabbed and the militia called but in the queue, there were no supporters of the law-abiding project. 
I dropped the empty bottle gently into the bin on the sidewalk outside the grocery store.

With tram changes, I reached the terminal in the Settlement, although it was not an easy task. 
After ‘Vsesvit’ at the midday break and no snack in the grocery store, the wine did not behave well in the stomach.
I could hardly keep it under control on the way to 13 Decemberists, where I threw it up and down into the spill pail in the veranda.
My mother, appearing from the kitchen, screamed in fright:
‘Kolya! He’s throwing up with blood!’
My father also went out to the veranda, but getting the whiff of a familiar scent, waved her fears off:
‘What blood? Don't you see? Zonked like the last scumbag.' 

I covered the pail with its lid, changed from my shoes into the slippers and silently passed by to fall onto the sofa without any comments that being first or last made no much difference in a series of scumbags.

Before the Prohibition, I was a very moderate drinker. 

My weekly dose of alcohol was the two bottles of beer after the visit to the bathhouse, but Gorbachev with his ‘dry law’ literally brought me to that excess.
Sure enough, the weeks were not absolute replicas of one another.
There happened more liberal weeks when the bricklayers of our team shared with me wine brought to the trailer.
But they did not bring it each week, and sharing also was not the dogma.

And that’s because of the principle with which I returned from the business trip to Kiev.
There I had a discussion with one young superintendent.
We considered the case of a worker lying, purely theoretically, on the ground next to an unfinished, say, trench.
The young theoretician claimed that the jack was just bombed and that’s the only possible hypothesis.
My counter-argument was based on the fact that the man had his spetzovka on and hence he had just fainted because people do not drink at their workplace. 
Of course, I knew perfectly well that they drink anywhere and with anything on, but at that moment, for some reason, I was inclined to assume the idealistic standpoint.

On my return to Konotop, when I was offered a drink in the trailer, I continued the stance of a fighter for ideal and declared that I did not drink at work, although I wanted it.
There followed a reasonable argument, that the trailer was not the workplace.
I had to make corrections to the principle wording and it ended up as ‘I do not drink in work clothes’.
Then they offered, in a form of a compromise, to change into clean clothes, have a swig and then change back. 

In the course of time, the procedure was reduced.
I simply got undressed in my underpants and tank-top, fuddled, just to be polite, and put my spetzovka back on.
In our team, the principles were treated with respect and I was tolerated even in such negligee.
Only the crane operator Vitalya used to explore and lose his temper:
‘Why share with him? He'll peach us!' 
‘No, he’s not a snitch.’
‘When the superintendent drops in and sees his underwear, can't he get it what we are up to?' 
But the crane operator was not a member of our team and Vitalya wasn’t even a Konotoper.
He came to work from Bakhmach, and just had that sort of a frantic temperament.

Once at the midday break he started to make fun:
‘Got stuck again in that ‘Vsesvit’ of yours? Come, have a drink! But don’t undress, I also have principles.’
He giggled, gaily flashed his eyes, grabbing the bottle with his hand missing a finger, and poured only for himself and Kyrpa...

One good turn deserves another.
For the next midday break, I bought a bottle of ‘Golden Autumn' and a bar of chocolate from the grocery store. 
Vitalya and Kyrpa were playing cards in the trailer.
I slowly undressed to the underwear and started sharing to the colleagues an exalted example of the sybaritic attitude to life by taking desultory sips from the bottle for 1 ruble 28 kopecks and nibbling at the expensive chocolate.

(...it was not a revenge at all, but pure pedagogy…) 

Vitalya kept himself in check for quite a long, but eventually, his temperament took over: 
‘Fuck! Snacking the mutter-mumbler swill with ‘Alenka’! What a pervert!’

But that, of course, was out of envy – in all his life he never tried it that way.
And I calmly drank the whole bottle and did not share it even with Kyrpa, who was backing Vitalya’s giggles the day before.

(...however, at times, some doubts creep in – was it really pedagogy or, after all, vengeful exhibitionism?..) 

On Thursday I stayed in the steam room a little longer and left the bathhouse at past seven.
Before the rule of Gorbachev, I would not even notice it – the blissful do not follow the time flow – however, the Prohibition placed the sale of alcohol in the rigid temporal frame. 
But my after-bath quota?!

In the beer bar on the opposite side of the square of Konotop Divisions, instead of the usual bright radiance of the fluorescent lamps, a misery yellow spot of a single bulb was seen inside. 
In sad distress, I was passing by, when noticed that the door of the bar opened and two men climbed down the high porch of the facility. 
Well, well, well!
The situation called for closer inspection.

The unlocked door subdued willingly to the light pressure.
And indeed, just one 100-watt bulb was lit inside above the beer tap.
Yet beer was still flowing from the tap into glasses!
Men were grabbing them and retreating to the high round tables.
If not for the scanty illumination, everything was like in the old good dry-lawless times!
Not everything, however.
The noise and din of warm friendly conversations were missing.
The barman in a white coat kept warning over and over again from behind the counter:
‘Keep quiet, mujiks! And be quick, we’re being breaching it.'

There's no buzz in the booze under the whip-clicks of a stopwatch...

Here, in the murky half-dark dungeon room, where you couldn’t make out the face of a man at the table opposite, we were like the last handful of Knights Templar after their order was defeated and announced anathema.
We hid there from the alcohol-free spies and informers.
Any low-grade trader could point at you and yell:
‘Hold him! Call the militia!’
We were outlaws...

Honestly, I do not really like beer bars.
You stand in line and watch how tipsy scumbags approach those ahead of you:
‘Bro, and a couple for me, eh?’
And instead of one line, you stand, in fact, two or three. 
Even more disgusting, when the tap is really near, you get a push on your side and a guy who you, like, have seen someplace, giggles and winks at you: 
‘Don’t forget? I asked three mugs.’

No, next time I'd rather go to a cafe where they sell only bottled, more expensive beer, but without those impudent on-tail-fallers. 

And on the following bath day Thursday I haughtily passed by the beer bar and stomped to the cafe.
‘We’ve got no beer.’
Damn.
Okay, let’s go to the Peace Square.
But in the cafe next to the cinema there also was no beer.
The railway station restaurant remained the last chance.
Same story.
But it’s Thursday!
So I was made buy a bottle of white wine.

The tables in the restaurant were big, for about ten persons each, surrounded by heavy chairs in leather upholstery, but with almost no guests.
I took a seat somewhere in the middle of the hall and started to pour wine into a glass as I would do it from a bottle of beer – in a knitting-needle-thin trickle. 
So was my habit.
After the first glass, I was approached by some mujik of an indeterminable occupation who asked for permission to sit nearby.
A whole hall of vacant tables and he liked this particular one.
Well, I did not object.
Landing into the next chair he began to state that he was in transit from the city of Lvov.
I answered that Lvov also was a good city, welcome in passing, and all that.
And I started to fill the following glass.
With intent stare at the thin trickle, he announced that he had just been released from the zone.
A couple of guys at the next but one table stopped their talk.
I congratulated him on being free at last and drank.

His face was suddenly distorted with an expression of unfigure-outable malice and he went over to loud threats to have an intercourse with my rectum when two of us would be in the same prison cell.

(...all that, of course, in more straightforward terminology…)

The wine was finished off, the neighbor on the table obviously did not like me, and I got up to leave.
One of the guys that were sitting nearby, was already standing between the tables.
‘Bang the bitch!’ he said to me. ‘What are you waiting for? We’re in!’
An absolutely unfamiliar guy.
Probably, he had a fit of patriotism.
‘You did not get it,’ answered I. ‘He’s not local. The hospitality law does not allow for crushing the bottle on his head. When on a vacation I’ll go to the city of Lvov and check what problem makes the travelers from there so impolite.’

I do not know if the guy understood my lengthy speech.
Anyway, he returned to his table and I went out leaving my neighbor in front of the empty bottle by the empty glass on the empty polish of the table. 

He resorted to the ultimate insult, yet the magic did not work and the bottle did not turn into a heap of pieces.
But still, I cannot forgive Gorbachev.
You ask what does Gorbachev have to do with fucking my asshole?
Even in the era of severe deficit and shortages, the bottled beer did not disappear in Konotop. 
Never.

But he did not stop and kept amending the Prohibition with new articles called to toughen the struggle with alcoholism...

In the evening of the day when the next wave of the toughest measures came into force, I, as usual, went to the Central Park dance floor.
However, I did not reach it, and I did not even reach the ticket office.
In the central alley of the park, I was intercepted by a muscular stranger with a dark hair and horseshoe-shaped mustache in the style of The Pesnyary. 

He told that I did not know him, but he knew me because of he was from KhAZ where he worked with my brother.
 
I recollected as my brother Sasha once enthusiastically talked about some former border guard demonstrating wonders of acrobatics at their workplace.
Probably, that was him.

The stranger carefully held a white plastic bag in his right hand and he did not slap the nasty night mosquitoes but instead blew them off from his biceps with sharp exhalations of air. 
Just like me, an adept of non-resistance, or so he was trained for frontier patrols to avoid producing unnecessary sound waves betraying your location. 

Giving a slight shake to the white bag—to which it responded with muted clandestine tinkle—he informed it was wine in there because he wisely procured it before the curfew. 
Would I keep him company?
The answer was in the affirmative.

It seemed strange to me though when he began to address the trickles of youngsters flocking to the dance floor with the same question – if they had a knife to open a bottle.
Everyone shook their heads and some even recoiled scared with the incongruity of the question with the general spirit of the current times.
Perhaps, that was his personal form of protest against the Prohibition.

The knife was never found, but he somehow contrived to tear the plastic cork off by application of a beam in the bench by which we stood in the alley.
He handed the bottle to me.
I said it would be better if he starts it because of a certain flaw in my brake system. 
‘Never mind. I've got another in the bag,' insisted he. 
Well, I had warned anyway, ain’t it?
And I killed the 700ml without a trace.
‘Hmm, yes,' said the companion thoughtfully. ‘I did not get it properly.' 

He uncorked the second bottle, but he did not give it to me, just held in his hands, and when we sank down on the bench, he put it between us.
We began to probe each other on which of the philosophical themes to start a friendly conversation.
As a rule, after the second glass, you start to give out smart things, getting astonished yourself by their unexpected wisdom. 
In the end, of course, everything will converge into the eternal gash predicted by the crane truck driver, Ivan Kot, but why not to shine with the well-trained mind for a starter?

Alas, the envious bad stars forestalled any shining, or sparkling, or flashing...

Along the alley slowly and almost noiselessly rolled a van with inscription ‘militia’ on the door.
The car pulled up and two gentlemen in cockades jumped out of the cab.
My interlocutor, not waiting for further developments of the events, without delay threw himself over the bench and started down the side alley towards the dark building of the city council.

I, who had just loaded one bottleful into the hold, could only admire how quickly he was leaving.
Moreover, those two cops were already standing over me.
None of them followed him, only the older one clattered his shoe heels against the asphalt remaining in the same spot.
His pretty fast step dancing he accompanied with a strange, possibly also Irish, song ‘oolyou-lyou!’.
The border guard accelerated sharply and disappeared into the darkness. 

The militiaman picked up the open but still not started bottle from the bench.
He turned it upside down in his outstretched hand and held so with a sadistic and sad air, as the wine gurgled out to the ground.

‘Come on,' the second man said to me, nodding at the already open side door of the van. 
I stuck my head inside.

In the dim light of a tiny bulb in the ceiling, those caught prior to me sat along the blind side walls. 
An elderly militia petty officer sat leaning his back against the partition from the cab facing the public.
Admiring the impeccable clearness of my movements, I ascended the interior.
The door slammed shut behind me.

‘Good evening!' amiably and indiscriminately greeted I all the present and at once got a kick in my ass. 
‘The bitch even ‘good-evening’ knows!’ yelled the petty officer who hit me.
Falling on someone from the previous catch, I automatically exclaimed:
‘I beg your pardon!’
And I looked back fearful of another kick.
But I saw that I was not going to get it for the ‘pardon’, the officer was too lazy to get up.

They drove us not too far.
It was the same courtyard where they once recorded the testimony of The Orpheuses on the disappearance of the German accordion, but now I was taken to another building. 

At the desk in the corridor there sat a Captain of the militia.
After a couple of questions to my fellow travelers, he sent them to the cell.
Then he turned to me.

Seeing that I answered his questions adequately and did not try to push for my rights or refute the report of the officers who delivered me, he asked me where I work.
Then he called somewhere to check and finally ordered me to go home.
‘Straight home! Got it? Nowhere else!’

I went out of the gate.
Why do they all tell me what to do?
Fuck them!
And I obstinately returned to the park and bought a ticket to the dance floor.

One of the public order enforcers at the gate doubtfully looked into my face:
‘Did you drink today?’
‘Never,’ said I and proceeded to my bench under the fence to sit until the end of dancing.
Which happened after a couple of numbers...

The notification of my detention reached the SMP-615 a month or two later.
I already forgot about it when the new boss called me from the construction site and demanded to write an explanatory.
He obviously decided to use the situation to full advantage and in a week appointed a meeting of the trade union committee to consider my personal case.

The autumn cold began and to the meeting, I came in my raincoat and hat. 

The boss, in his jacket and tie, began to expound my sinful deeds.
The freshest of them, attested by the paper from the militia, as I was violating directives of the party and government on the park bench. 
That’s how I disgrace the SMP-615 before the public and authorities!
How long to tolerate?

However, I chose the position of an observer and to all rhetorical questions answered with a shrug of my left shoulder under the raincoat.

And my mocking attitude to the management?
Look here – an explanatory written in verse!
 From the stack of papers on the desk in front of him, the boss picked one up and shook it in the air.

Wow! I did not know such a dossier had accumulated on me…

Another sample!
The reminder I wrote to the trade union committee:
‘Three months ago I applied for upgrading my bricklayer category.
However, till now the qualification commission of the SMP-615 neither raise their eyebrow nor turn their horn.’

The trade union committee thundered with laughter, the boss, obedient to the herd reflex, also grunted not understanding what was funny.

And it’s just dangerous to be nearby me.
I was putting an arm under the slab! 

It is a fact.
On that day there were four of us: the overseer Karenin, the carpenter Ivan, the crane operator Vitalya and I.
The sun was shining upon the March snow of the construction site when we were starting a new apartment building.

The foundation blocks were laid in the pit since autumn and then throughout the winter, Ivan was coming to the site to watch it from 8 to 5. 
He came, turned on the heater in the trailer and watched the white snowdrifts outside the window, or the portraits of the cute beauties from girlie magazines glued on all the walls...

On that March day, he became my hand. 
The task was simple – to lay four courses of bricks in the short wall of the future staircase entrance for mounting a stump of a slab over the future basement entrance.

Standing on the trestle between the foundation blocks, I raised two low corners and started laying courses under the shoorka to finish the stump supporting wall. 
It was a half an hour’s work while to the workday end there remained a little more than an hour.

However, Vitalya the crane operator was impatient to climb down from his perch in the cab of his tower crane and play cards with Ivan till five.
So Vitalya shouted from above to the carpenter to hook the concrete slab stump intended for the installation.
The stump’s one side would lay onto the blocks of the traverse wall, the other side would rest on the corners of the unfinished wall.
They’ll eat it!
The remaining gape between the corners would be filled sometime after, in the process of building.

I tried to explain to Ivan, that it was the most convenient moment for finishing the started wall.
Later, to fill the gap left under the stump the bricklayers would not have the trestle under their feet.
Let him better bring the mortar and I’d finish it in fifteen minutes working under such favorable conditions.

Vitalya for Ivan was closer than logic, he went and hooked the stump as said.
The crane operator raised the load up, turned the beam and rolled the tower along the rails carrying the stump to me for insertion as he had planned. 
He shouted from his cab to quickly spread mortar on the corners of the unfinished wall otherwise he would drop it just as it was on dry bricks – they’ll eat it!

Instead of mortar, I put my arm on a brick corner so that he did not fulfill his intention.
Vitalya fervently swore from his birdhouse in the height, rang the bell of the crane without interruption and keep closing in on the arm with the load.

In general, it was a frontal attack of two fighter planes against each other: he who yields’s a snotty chicken.
When the concrete stump neared the arm to about a meter, overseer Karenin awoke from watching the breath-taking battle of two aces and yelled to Vitalya take the load aside.
And there it hung while I finished the wall the way it was right. 

Overseer Karenin stood on the blocks above my head and asked:
‘Why did you do it, Sehrguey? He’s crazy enough to crush your arm. You’d be a cripple.’
‘Karenin, all my life is crushed. Everything that remained is my work. I don’t want they make a snot of it.’
‘Where?’ asked Ivan standing on the other wall of blocks behind my head. ‘What’s the talk about crushin’?’
‘He means it was his written fate from birth,’ overseer Karenin explained to him.

I was finishing the last course of bricks, like, busy, but I could not let the erudite conversation go without me:
‘May his hand wither, to that writer!’
Karenin and Ivan got silent at once.
The overseer somehow shrank and turned his eyes aside.

And it was that very moment, squinting my eyes in the rays of the sun descending to the horizon and spreading mortar for insertion of the slab stump onto the finished wall, that I thought for the first time that the events of our lives are defined and occur in the way that we ourselves will describe them in our later life. 
And it doesn’t matter to whom and whether in words or in writing…

(...it’s scary!
It turns out that with that curse of mine I wished my hand get withered away?!..)

Ivan and I inserted the stump.
Vitalya got down from the tower crane and still had time for playing cards with Ivan before we went to the road to meet and get on our Seagull.
I soon forgot the whole incident, however, the boss did not omit to add it to the dossier. 

‘And you know as well as I do, how often they take him to the psychiatric hospital.
Besides, he is a chronic violator of labor discipline. 
Three occurrences of absenteeism in only one year!
That’s why my proposal is to dismiss him for systematic absenteeism.’

That’s right – two days to Moscow after the modal train for Andrew, and one day to the publishing house ‘Dnipro’ in Kiev.

At the time of each of my violations, I was realizing it was an act of absenteeism. 
However, it was normal for a worker at the SMP-615 to have a week of absenteeism, and a couple of champions had up to twenty days.
I considered the fact as a guarantee of permissibility to skip three days, the grosser violators would serve a cover for my ass.
No go!
The labor discipline can’t be bribed with a smartie’s calculations!

And now, after five consequential records in my workbook with gratitude and appreciation of my labor achievements, on October 18, 1985, the head of personnel department of the SMP-615, A. Petukhov, with that same handwriting wrote that I had been dismissed on the strength of Article 40, for absenteeism without satisfactory excuse. 

The participants in the meeting of the trade union committee unanimously voted for the measure proposed by the boss.
Afterwards, some of them commented such a result was exclusively my fault, I should have stood up, and, with the hat in my hand, humbly asked for mercy and they would forgive me. 

Why did I keep to the role of an observer to the end and did not make a speech in self-defense pointing out the absenteeism of others not few, and did not express my bitter regret for my wrong-doings?
I had got fed up.
The time had come to look for new points of application for my experimentalism.
Not because of so was my plan, though.
I, as always, remained just a tool, an operation-end man executing his orders.
The time and experimentalism were the decision-making bodies...

Besides, in summer a new 100-apartment block was finished. 
A bricklayer from our team, named Nina, a fat woman with a hairy birthmark on her cheek, got an apartment in it.
She entered the SMP-615 a couple of months before the commissioning of the apartment block and, having received an apartment, quit the organization.

I went to the personnel department and asked Petukhov about my progress in the line for getting an apartment.
He answered I was number 35 in it.
That’s ridiculous!
Six years before, I was 24th in the line!

He replied with calligraphic roundness since those times three bosses replaced each other and he himself had not yet been around and now my place in the list was thirty-fifth and he had no other data to refer to...

Fare thee well, my beloved construction train! 
Farewell, our team!
I won't set on fire our trailer, even though my guitar, brought on the Grinya's birthday, disappeared from it... 
