
When the last entry in the workbook says ‘on strength of Article’ you are sort of blacklisted – nowhere they have a job for you.

However, in Konotop there was an enterprise not too much afraid of blacklisted people, ‘Rags’ was the name of the brave company, aka recycling factory.
Taking into account my basic specialty, they gave me the job of a worker at the overhauling section. 

The overhaul consisted of three workers, but we did not do any major repair, neither any repair at all, for that matter.
We sat in the room, idling the time and occasionally went into the yard of the factory with stacks of modern recycling equipment brought there a year, maybe two, before and protected from the weather vagaries with a giant cover of black roofing felt because the building for the equipment had not been built yet.
The factory itself huddled in a pair of barrack-like structures – the offspring from the era of the first five-year plans – and two tall arched hangars from corrugated aluminum and a number of various huts leaning against the wall around the factory grounds.

But at the very beginning of my overhaul career, I was not bored. 
I was sent on a business trip to the city of Kiev.

The then Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Ukraine, Comrade Scherbitsky, had planned to visit the Kiev recycling factory in order to share valuable instructions on the development of so an important branch of the national economy. 
As the result, the recycling factories from all over the Soviet Socialist Republic of Ukraine were sending their workers to Kiev to spit and polish the metropolitan recycling factory for the high-ranking visit. 
When I arrived to make my contribution, the metal structures in the shop floors of the factory had been painted for the fourth time and the factory yard covered with the third layer of asphalt.

They were farewell days of golden autumn, the sun smiled affectionately from the calm sky, but the sight of small fur trees in stone pots to decorate the courtyard called for the blues to set in.
The insufficient capacity of the pots would not allow for the trees to grow and they were destined to inevitably wither after the pompous visit.

Before leaving for the business trip, I went to the Konotop Department Store to buy a sports bag for the necessary things.
As it turned out there was a fit of the deficit for such bags and I had to buy a smaller, though practical one, however, if you look closely, it was, after all, a female goods item. 
Might have I really been a pervert?

To stay in Kiev I was billeted at a boarding house near the ‘Pipe', on the very bank of the Dnieper river. 
Before the war, there was a plan to cross the Dnieper at that place by a metro line. 
They even managed to build a stop from the reinforced concrete that looked indeed like a giant pipe with a diameter as tall as a two-story house.
Later, the circumstances and plans were changed and the ‘Pipe’ got covered with all sorts of ‘here were Osya and Kisa’ and the like historical stamps.

The boarding house was a long one-story wooden structure with pencil-box rooms, like in the hostels, only the windows were wider.
In the mornings I went out on the sandy bank of the mighty stream to do exercises among the willow bushes.

To look at the Dnieper from so a-near was not at all like watching it from a local train flying over along the bridge. 
The oceanic mass of the water rolling by simply bewildered.
And so for thousands of years without a stop…
Three, four, bend left, bend right…

In the room, besides me, lived a blond from Southern Ukraine with a graphical story how he was stabbed on the beach. 
The familiar bros from the same neighborhood.
Jabbed a knife in the stomach and he fell on his back.
And then the precinct approached.
The guys pretended to play cards, and they threw an open newspaper over the knife.
The militiaman started asking about something, and the blond lay and looked, and couldn’t say a word, and flies were lading and running upon the newspaper.
The guys, naturally:
‘No, we know nothing.’
When the precinct left they called an ambulance because of he had not knocked on them... 

There was almost no renovation work left to be done at the factory and the business trippers were sitting in the Red Corner room where the young and bearded artist, from the local, wrote out the letters of the same slogan, day after day, on the same long strip of red fabric spread along a very long table, or gossiping with his friends, also Kievers, who knew ways to get in to him through the Checkpoint at the gate.

We changed clothes right there, in the spetzovkas given out by the factory, and hung ours onto the chairs.
The shower was working round the clock behind the turn of the corridor – some halcyon days in full swing.

My fellow business trippers were amazed by my ability to so insistently sit at the same place without strolling around the Red Corner or telling anything, and only look and listen...

After another of working days, I returned to the boarding house and got it that the blond went home because in the room remained only my bed, and my perverted bag was wide open and my last ten rubles were missing from it. 
And there still remained one week before the end of my business trip.

The next morning, it was Saturday, I went out in search of food.
I did not make any definite plan, but simply walked towards the distant bridge across the Dnieper. 
Then I walked along that almost traffic-less bridge supported with a multitude of steel cables from pylons.

Behind the bridge in the field to the right rose several tall apartment blocks – the embryo of the Troyeschina area, but I passed by and on, towards the faraway forest.
The road went through the village of Pohrebby and entered the forest.
There I started looking for mushrooms.

I came across only two species and both were unfamiliar.
Their gills looked alike, but those with pointed caps turned out to be very bitter, so I had to eat the other, concave ones. 
The hunger slackened and I went back.

In the field between the village and the distant high-rise building, I hit the mother lode. 
There was a scattering of potatoes on the roadside.
Probably, the truck was loaded with potatoes piling above the sides and during the transportation, the surplus poured over when the truck dodged an oncoming vehicle. 
I stuffed my pockets with potatoes and on Sunday came to the same place with the obviously female bag.

In the boarding house, at the very end of the corridor, was a kitchen with gas stove and a large common pan.
I boiled unpeeled potatoes for a few days.

And when I was coming back to Kiev over the bridge with the steel cables, I got it what prevented me from living a normal life, it was because of my poetry.
Everyone else was living like all the other people because they do not write poetry.
If I gave it up, then maybe everything would be all right...

It’s easy to say ‘it’s time to give up’, but how?
To burn the pocket notebook which the blond generously left in my bag?
Overly trivial.
And I decided to make a collection of poems and put an end to all that.
Such was the plan.

On Monday, I visited the waiting room of the head of the personnel department and asked his secretary-typist for 32 blank sheets of paper.
Exactly the volume of ‘Manifesto of the Communist Party’ by Karl Marx, but just as many pages were needed for all the poems plus the preface.
Apart from that, she gave me two uncut sheets, she couldn’t use them because of that defect.
Yet, the double sheet served a perfect folder for the rest.
In the Red Corner room, I asked the artist to make from that folder a cover for a collection of poems titled ‘Just so?’

In the evening at the boarding house, I copied the preface and the poems to the sheets of paper with almost typeset handwriting.

The following morning at the factory, the artist showed the cover he created – the author name and the collection title against the background of abstract-style beige waves.
Then he scratched the back of his head and confessed, that he had started the creation being tired and emotional and, as a result, the author together with the title was on the back, and not on the front cover. 
Defective double sheets were a rarity and I had no other choice but to paginate the collection in Arabic style – from the back cover to the front...

It’s very convenient to live in the same city with a publishing house, finishing work at five, you have plenty of time to visit them without any absenteeism.

In the office where the young man once sent me to the specialist on Maugham, there were already two – another young man and a young woman.
I asked where they were handing poetry in.
They were delighted and gave direction to the first office around the left corner in the corridor.

In the said office, on my report of delivering a collection of poetry I heard the familiar question:
‘Who sent you?’
‘Ah! Yes, sure! I was sent from the neighboring office, just around the corner. D’you know them?’
That served a sufficient recommendation for the collection to be transferred from hand to hand.

I left the publishing house both grieving and laughing.

Grieving?
I had rejected my offspring and I had pledged to keep sterile infertility from now on and forever.

Laughing?
I was free!

(...any poem started dooms you to bondage.
You strain yourself and plow like a slave until you can step aside and say ‘yes, like, it’s so-so, enough, I can’t do better...’ …)

Even louder I laugh at the poetry receiver because there was no return address on the collection only the fictitious name of the author ‘Klim Solokha’.
That’s it!
‘...service's done...’

‘What was their reaction?’ the artist asked.
‘A standing ovation.’

The existing supply of potatoes could see me until the end of the week, however just potatoes somehow did not satiate, even if sprinkled with salt.
The artist noticed when in the Red Corner I picked up a bread roll forgotten by someone and got dry on a windowsill and ate it hiding in my fist.
He told about it to the head of the personnel department. 
The head, with the mask of eternal disdain and dissatisfaction on his face, came to the Red Corner already empty of the business trippers of whom I was the last and asked what the matter. 

The money was lost from my bag.
Stolen? Who?
I knew nothing. There were ten rubles that were there no more.

He gave a displeased itch to his face and went out.
Soon they called me to his office and he said that he would stamp my business trip papers as completed (there remained still three more days) but I had to perform an urgent work: a KAMAZ truck dumped a heap of sand in a wrong place in the yard, the sand had to be moved but a bulldozer would hack the fresh asphalt with its caterpillars.

It took me two or three hours to shovel the sand to hide it behind the pots with doomed small fur trees.
I was paid ten rubles for the job, which I immediately received from the cashier in the accountancy. 
The local train ticket to Konotop was four rubles plus.

I went to a grocery store, bought a bottle of vodka, transparent as a tear of separation, something there for a snack, and returned to the Red Corner.
Together with the artist, we drank that vodka for the success of the collection of poetry which pages had to be turned backward... 

The overhaul at the Konotop recycle factory was headed by Yura, one of its three workers.
He loved to laugh and did it ably, exposing the fixture of white metal on his fang.
In the white-and-black films they usually portrayed Komsomol leaders looking like him, but only the fix did not fit into the image.

The second overhauler was Arsen, slightly cross-eyed but not too much so. 
He put on the airs of a dignified aqsaqal, despite his young age.
The reason for his pride in himself was that his son had already reached the age of two years.

I got on well with Arsen but Yura tried hard to crush me.
Most likely because of his intolerance to my high education.
I did not tell anyone about it, but those four years were recorded in my workbook kept in the personnel department and Yura spent a long time in the administration barracks and was everyone’s friend there.
The main impediment to establishing friendly relations between us two were my quotations and sharing news from ‘Morning Star’.
Arsen, for his part, tried to pacify our skirmishes.

Once in a conversation with Arsen I cited a quote from the work of Karl Marx ‘On the Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State’

(...Generally speaking, Frederick Engels is considered to be the author of that work, however, Fritz printed it after Karl had already passed away giving his bosom friend the opportunity to rummage through his archives and unpublished works in progress.
Probably, Engels, like the blond from Southern Ukraine considered himself entitled to expropriate belongings of the absent.
After all, he had supported Karl and his wife all their lives with the money of his father, also Fritz…)

I did not expose all those details to Arsen, just recited a couple of lines from the work itself.
Yura was around and he suddenly snapped in with the demand that I would never dare start provocative talks like this in his presence because he was a communist and knew where to give a phone call on statements of that kind.
For the first time in our clashes, the last word remained his. 
He dumbfounded me with his threat to halloo the KGB at the founders of Marxism-Leninism.
And that's no fun for they would gladly run them down, for all I know...

Another time, I was depicting to Arsen the Wagner's ballet about Scottish witches which I attended during the business trip to Kiev. 
Dancing a solo dance, one of the witches stumbled and with a wooden knock fell flat onto the stage floor.
‘Ha-ha-ha!’ cheerfully reacted Yura who again happened in the overhaul room.
‘And imagine, Arsen, in the whole hall there was not a single jerk to laugh at her.
She got up and danced on, showed her mettle, in short.’

And Yura too showed that it was not in vain that he kept visiting the administration.
I was transferred to the production section, to the post of a presser. 

What, actually, were Rags?

It's a place where railway cars were bringing scrap sorted at rubbish dumps. 
Worn and discarded clothing for the most part, as well as waste paper.

Women from the nearby village of Popovka dissected the tatters with the howling disks of their machines and again sorted rugs into soft mounds on the floor of the passage – knitted rags, artificial fur collars from winter coats etc. 
The whole day they stood in front of their machines in dusty coats with dangling clusters of safety pins on the chest which they detected and pulled out from fabrics so that they do not damage the disc.
Such grapes of pins made them evil-eye-proof indeed.

Two loaders approached the rags mounds with a deep box on long poles, like a sedan chair.
Their faces were wrapped in bandannas in bank robbers style not to inhale the dust from the dense clouds of it near the machines. 
They piled rags into their box and carried to the neighboring pressing section going in precipitated half-trot.
That jogging gait was dictated by the weight of the load.

(...once or twice I replaced someone of the missing loaders but was not able to do more than a couple of goes.
‘Sehryoga! You must be relaxed when carrying. Relax!’
Yet even with those instructions I could not reach relaxation with long pole-handles slipping out of the clenched hands…)

The press was also a box but it had a door and no poles because it stood on the floor in one place.
With the door open, first of all, you needed to put on the box bottom two thin and narrow metal strips, aka shinka, and take their ends out of the box. 
Then you drape the box inside with a piece of sackcloth and lock the door with a hook outside.
You fill the box with the trash brought by the loaders until it’s full and hit one the three buttons on the press side.
The electric motor on the press frame starts to crawl with cracking and howling down the shaft, pushing the press shield, on which it is fixed, also down.
The shield presses the trash to the bottom as deep as it can.
When the motor howling tone changes to whining it means the motor had done all it could and has no power to squeeze any further.
At that point, you hit the ‘stop' button and then the button ‘up'. 
The shield with the motor starts the return crawling up the shaft.
Its ups and downs the press executes really slowly.

Now you fill the space in the box produced by the shield’s travel with additional rags because the ready bale weight should be about 60 kg.
After the shield’s third going down stop it and tie tightly the ends of shinka getting a roughly cubic bale.
Send the shield up and roll the finished bale out of the box.
Roll it away along the floor so that it will not in the way of the following bales.

When there accumulates a flock of bales, Misha the loader comes with a two-wheel barrow. 
He drives the bottom shelf of the vertically held barrow under the bale and pulls the handles to himself.
The bale lays upon the handles supported with the shelf from behind.
Misha drags the barrow towards the exit from the pressing section.

Near the exit gate there stands the booth of Valya the weigher with a large luggage scales next to it.
Misha passes the bale onto the scales and, having dipped a short stick into a tin can with paint, writes on the sackcloth wrapping of the bale its weight figures which Valya shouted him through the glass of her booth because Misha is old and half deaf.

Then he drops the bale from the scales, again tilts it onto the wheelbarrow and drags it out of the pressing section into the open air, and there along the path of crippled concrete into the hangar for the finished product.

When an empty railway freight car was stopped by the hangar, the bales were stacked into it and taken away, no matter where, probably, to some factories for further processing of recyclables.

In the pressing section, there was only one window crusted with the dust accumulated there from the period of the First Five-Year Plan. 
The illumination was served by yellowish dim bulbs, one over each of the four presses.
True, one of them did not work, but for two presser workers, the remaining three were enough. 

The production norm for a presser was thirty-two bales per shift. 
I hardly fit into working time, and the other presser, Misha who lived with Valya the bale weigher, would have finished the norm ahead of time and left, whistling haphazard airs. 
He was more experienced presser and did not put excessive quantities of rags into the press box, while my bales were with overload.

Loader Misha would shake his deaf head disapprovingly writing with the dipped stick ‘78’ or ‘83’ on the bales of my production.
Then he with a groan took the bale on the barrow and dragged it out because he was a strong old man.
He was silent by nature and did not reprove me.
I felt guilty but all the same, could not catch the hang of guessing the weight of the rags in the press box... 

Apart from the midday break, there were two more half an hour breaks, just to rest.
We spent them in the common large room with lockers along two of its walls.
In the wall opposite the door, there were two windows also covered with dust but not so ancient, and large enough to make the room light. 
Four square tables with white plastic covered tops were put in a row along the room's middle line forming one common table for the midday meal. 
Long plank benches stood by its sides.
That was the locker room of pressers and jacks who changed their clothes there.
However, in the midday break, the Popovka women came there also because in theirs there was not a table to have a meal at. 

I did not have havvage there.
For the midday meal, I traveled to the canteen of the ‘Motordetail' plant. 
I crossed the railway track and went over the field, then I turned into the forest belt and followed the trail there to the tram 1 terminal opposite the plant check entrance.
The whole journey took fifteen minutes.

It was a very modern plant and through the glass walls of the canteen on the second floor opened the view on the field from where I came.
There were no problems at the check entrance, anyone in a spetzovka was considered a worker of the plant.

The havvage portions at the canteen were small but cheap and then for a couple of hours you did not feel any hunger. 
Sometimes the bale weigher Valya ordered to bring her a cake from the canteen.

On the way back, crossing the railway track in front of freight trains locomotives that were waiting for ‘green’ to enter Konotop station, I tried to bribe the locomotives with the cake wrapped in a piece of paper.
They had such good-natured faces with a red beard, like on the sail of the Kon-Tiki raft.
But they remained incorruptible.
“Well, as you please, then!’ and I was carrying the cake on to the bale weigher Valya...

And in half-hour breaks, we were playing ‘goat' with dominoes and talking. 
Besides the mujiks, there also rested the bale weigher Valya and a couple of younger women from Popovka, and sometimes the technologist Valya came as well.
She was a big woman, a poet's dream, but I had already given up those things. 

There were four jacks in the locker room but the old Misha kept silent all the time and never chip in.
And even ‘goat’ he played very rarely.

The jack Volodya Kaverin with a narrow reddish mustache running down to his chin, was, on the contrary, loud and passionate, but the jack Sasha with a dark toothbrush mustache restrained his partner’s impulses.
He was tall, calm, reliable and—what a small place the world is!—the husband of that very Valya from the typist pool who had typed the collection of short stories by Maugham in Ukrainian.
The fourth jack, Vanya, was chubby and shaved his round face.

He sometimes threatened to smash my fucking mug for some of my words, but I doubted it – you could see from his face that he was a kind man. 
Besides, he was a woman-hater and, holding the dominoes bones in his palm used to declare all of them to be bitches.
‘I’m on top of her, pumping, plowing, doing my level best and she just lays with her eyes into the ceiling “oy, Vanya! there’s so much cobweb in the corner!”, well, ain’t they bitches after that?!’

Even a saint wouldn’t hold himself back from adding a word:
‘Poor boy!’ says I, ‘such a humiliation leaves no choice but become gay indeed.’
And he again began fiddling his score of breaking my fucking mug.
However, chances to see his threat fulfilled were slim.
Knitted brows in Vanya's round face couldn't hide away his heart of gold...

At the end of winter, the factory workers traditionally went on a three-day excursion to Moscow. 
Not all, of course, only those who wanted to.
The technologist Valya asked me if I wanted.
I had to admit that I hardly had enough money to live until the payday. 
‘Don’t talk nonsense,’she said, ‘ the trade union pays for food and accommodation. You can go there with just three rubles.’
That was a challenge to the experimentalist.
I signed up for the tour and prepared the three rubles bill...

We arrived in Moscow in the evening.

The small column of the tourists was headed by Yura and led through the immense railway station to the square, it was not his first year in those tours.
I was the file closer keeping my hands in the empty pockets of the demi-season camel coat.
A bus was already waiting for us on the square to take to the Red Square.

The bus stopped and all the tourists went out to pass by the mummy of Lenin in the Mausoleum.
There only remained the bus driver, the guide Olya and I.
‘Are not you going?’ asked Olya.
‘I don’t like the dead.’
The driver slightly turned from the steering wheel to look back.

Obviously, to the Red Square arrived more buses with the excursionists from different other places of our vast Homeland because the driver opened the door and three more guide girls climbed up inside.
They knew each other and in brisk shoptalk were discussing the internal affairs of their tour operating organization and anything else. 

On fulfilling their sacred duty, the recycle factory employees returned from the frost-bound Red Square rubbing and slapping the shoulders of their coats and jackets.
We were taken to the VeDeNeKhA area, to a hotel built in the late fifties for participants of the World Festival of Youth and Students. 
The guide Olya specified details of the further cooperation: on the morning of the third day the bus would take us to the railway station because we were more interested in combing through all kinds of stores than in ‘look-to-the-right, look-to-the-left’, wasn’t it so?
Everyone joined in the chorus chanting that yes it was so.

We had our havvage in a canteen located in a separate building.
One of the canteen employees recommended me not to leave my camel coat on the hanger at the end of the hall. 
‘But eating with the coat off is more convenient.’
‘Look, Vera!’ she shouted to another worker in the canteen kitchen. ‘There’s one more guest from Communism!’

Since I was not at all interested in shopping, I mostly walked around the area, had a ride on a trolley bus to its terminal and even found a newsstand with ‘Morning Star’ on sale.
In Konotop, because of the explosive situation in Poland, that newspaper was often missing even at the railway station news-stall.
Probably, the editors in England were covering Polish events incorrectly.

Three rubles was not a sum to live in a grand style, but I still watched a historical action movie starring Karachentsev.

(...ours, in general, can make fifteen minutes of a movie quite watchable but the rest may have been safely skipped…)

To the hotel ‘Polyarny’ I went by metro.
Since it was the daytime, the restaurant guests were some kind of excursionists, because they all were sitting one by another along the table assembled from smaller ones put in a row and ate their havvage with their fur coats and overcoats on.

I asked a man in a waiter uniform jacket to call the waiter Nikolay but he only shrugged his shoulders.
Then I demanded the head waiter.
A tall woman came out in the same uniform jacket.
‘A year ago I had dinner at your restaurant when paying I was one ruble short. I promised the waiter to make up later. His name was Nikolay, he had a clever round face. Pass it to him, please.' 
And I handed her a ruble.
She silently accepted.
