
And I found another place to pass the time for free – the Central Library after the name of V. I. Lenin.
They gave a ticket there without any money as long as you had your passport.
That’s a really grand place the Central Library after Lenin, yes.
A cross between a theater and a metro station.
In short, the temple of book-worshipers.
Even the doors as tall as a church gate and with the inscription on the door handle ‘pull’.
So I did.

And behind the door was the vestibule with a window in the blind wall where they gave a free ticket if you had the passport, and then another door to the hall also very spacey.
It turned out to be the cloakroom but with white columns and at the far end of the hall were the stairs of milky white marble.
And all around the hall the friendship of peoples of the planet in full swing – all kinds of Burmese and Senegalese, yet the Whites also could be seen.

Then I saw the cloakroom was somehow out of balance – on its left side the cloakroom attendants were a-trot between the hangers and the marble barrier with bundles of coats: hither-thither, back and forth and the line to them did not shorten; but those on the right stood idle. 

I felt sorry for the trotters, so I turned right and dumped my camel on the white marble barrier of the slackers.
They hardly paid any attention.
Then one of them in a lordly manner deigned to explain – their half was for academicians.

Some f-f.. frightful segregation with discrimination.
As if my camel would graze their fur coats!
In short, I thanked for the information and walked to the other side for mere mortals.

Before the stairs of milky white stretched up in the height, there was a narrow gate not seen from afar. 
They check your ticket at the gate and give more slips of paper and only then let go up between a pair of militiamen standing by for the respect to order.

Up there high above the cloakroom the endless ranks of catalogs in boxes that looked like automatic storage cells, only the color not metallic but wooden. 

I rummaged through the wired cards and found Freud, his lectures published in 1913 on the occasion of somewhat of his jubilees.
A conjuncture publication of just 60 pages.
I wrote out all the indices and other marks of that booklet and went to the reading room to get an hour of pleasure. 
Greetings!
The attendant looked into my application slip and shouted like people shout calling the militia to save them from muggers: Freud?!!
Exactly, says I, I wanna see what the guy was about, be so kind, please.

That’s when she rubbed my silly nose in.
To have access to the mentioned book, says she, I had to be a Ph.D. of relevant sciences and be a permanent resident of the Moscow city (the free ticket testified that I wasn't) and the last but not least, I had to produce a document asserting that the gods of scientific Olympus allowed me to open the book. 
My jubilation ceased with a fizzle and in a state of a dulled calm, I climbed down the pasteurized stairs to collect my camel and go...

I went out into the street caged in calm as thick as bullet-proof glass.
No desire to go anywhere, no wish to want anything.
On reaching the underpass to metro, I leaned my back against the parapet and once again eyed the pompous building of the Central Library after Lenin.
My mind was perfectly empty and somewhere in the background there floated the lines from Shevchenko:

‘… learn what is foreign, keep what is yours...’

Damn, folks!
Where am I?
The huge temple, the giant letters: Central Library Lenin.
What was his ultimate goal?
So that workers could read books!
His bequeath had been drummed into our heads, dinned in the ears, rammed down the throat:
‘Learn, learn, and learn!”

And what is the result?
Before the Great October Revolution, in 1913, any worker could look into a bookstore and buy those 60 pages of lectures, if so was his wish. 
After the mentioned revolution in the Central Library after Lenin they told me: ‘fuck yourself! there’s no book for you because you are a worker!’

So I stood there, rooted into the parapet, full of crystal-like stillness.
I was awakened with the scraping din from all sides. 
And I saw a dozen of workers shoveling the snow along the sidewalk.
The sun shone brightly and they scrubbed and looked at me as if they were waiting for something.
And what could I share?
I had just got the fuck myself.
Or maybe they wanted to scrub along the parapet too?
Well, I tore off my roots and joined the flow to the underpass, to hide deeper from the shining peaks… 

On the agreed morning the bus came and the senior recycler signed the papers brought by the guide that they drove us three days all around the capital, telling about its historical and architectural sites.
And everyone was satisfied.
The guide Olya, who enjoyed three days of paid leisure.
The shoppers loaded with the snapped deficits.
The driver with the three-day ration of gasoline which could be put into circulation.
And most of all – I, with a coin in my pocket worth fifteen kopecks.
The technologist Valya did not exaggerate – you can have Moscow for three days with just three rubles in your pocket...

The only drawback was that I owe the factory those three days, that is three daily norms of thirty-two bales each. 

The technologist Valya said not to worry and to produce two or three surplus bales every day until I made up.
I never liked to be in debt and on the third day after return from Moscow, I came to work with a snack wrapped in a newspaper, aka ‘brake’, to keep me during my period of Stakhanovite labor.

When the factory bus took everyone to the city and Popovka women went home on foot, I faced the creaky howling slow-go press and the mountain of rags that grew up around it during my Moscow recreation and almost did not decrease in the finished day-shift.
I worked the second shift, then the third, and even managed to sleep in the locker room for about twenty minutes before the start of the new working day.

In the summer, another presser was added to us and very timely, because the presser Misha went on vacation.
The newcomer had some kind of a long oriental name because he was a Tajik, but I could not pronounce it in any way.
I dropped my attempts at unfamiliar phonetics and started to call him simply Ahmed.

Ahmed was short and swarthy and never parted with his happy smile until he tried to enjoy a midday meal in the canteen of ‘Motordetail’ plant.
Then he lay on a bench in the locker room and the women from Popovka were regretfully shaking their heads above him and sharing all kinds of healthcare advises.
After the payday, he began to come to work with ‘brakes' wrapped in newspaper and his digestion got adjusted. 

On his first working day, it was I who passed to him the secrets of the presser profession. 
Finishing the explanations on the purposes of the three press buttons and after demonstrating how a skillful presser locks the box door with the hook outside it, I started to share my delight with a certain German poet who had declared that all seagulls, when in flight, look like the capital ‘E’.
And why?
The name of his beloved was Emma!
Is he not a fine fellow? Eh? Had noticed!

Seized with a lecturer’s fervor, in the dim light of a bulb, I scratched that same ‘E’ with a scrap piece of wire on the gray plaster of the nearby wall.

(...and now ask me: what for did I nag at a guiltless guy about the unnecessary facts regardless of his poor understanding of Russian?
The answer is: so is the human nature.
The desire to teach is chiseled in our genes. 
To visualize this trite truth look out of the window into the yard and watch the everyday picture: some mujik has raised the hood of the car and a whole swarm of advisers surrounds him at once to share, to flash with a personal crumb of knowledge. 
The desire is uncontrollable as in that barber who spied the ass ears of King Midas:
‘I know! Listen to me!’…)

At Rags among the wastes sometimes were found usable things.
So, in the locker of the jack Sasha there were stored about half a dozen sweaters with and without the raindeers across the chest. 
And he every day was sporting another sweater.

Volodya Kaverin did not care for small fish.
He collected fur cuffs and collars from discarded coats so that when he had enough he would order to sew him a fur jacket or maybe a fur coat.
He had collected three collars so far and twice a week he would take them out of his locker, shook in turn and ask you: 
‘It should work out a nishtyak jacket, right?’

Vanya, in his locker, was keeping a parade tunic of the lieutenant colonel of the Soviet Army with golden shoulder straps and everything.

When I was sent on the errand to buy vodka from the liquors store on the Semashko street, they at once equipped me with a kind of jeans I would once have only dreamed about.
And only that maple leaf embroidered on the right thigh was, in my opinion, some excessive addition to design.

The line to the store began long before it and it was incomprehensibly looped along the sidewalk for which fact the lines of that sort were named ‘Gorbachev loops’.
But it's not worth to call it so out loud because, as the rumors had it, the KGB sec-cols were present among the thirsty part of the population to pick fresh jokes and take note of effusively dissatisfied citizens. 

Because of those rumors, I demanded a camouflage outfit from the recycling colleagues and everyone agreed that, yes, it was necessary. 

Despite the disguise I still was identified by the pair of errand-boys from the SMP-615, however, they chose to keep aloft. 

(...to get into such line after the end of the working day and reach the store before it was closed was unthinkable.
That’s why the enterprises had developed an interlayer of errand-boys among the employees.
The workers covered their absence and did jobs ‘for that guy’…)

Along with its progress, the line was often shaken with panic rumors that vodka at the store was running out. 
Indeed, the movement stalled.
But to the store back a truck came and volunteers with enthusiasm dragged inside the wire boxes of 25 bottles each... 

I returned to the recycle factory with vodka at half-past four. 
Two jacks, in turn, had been pressing the bales to fulfill my daily norm. 
Because of inexperience, they produced the bales with underweight.
The bale weigher Valya was displeased and loudly yelled from her booth.
The deaf Misha kept joyful silence dragging his barrow with light bales to the hangar outside.
Gaining acceleration, we were entering reconstruction, aka perestroika...

And with all the deficit of terry towels, in the washing room where everyone washed the dust off their dirty hands before the meal, no less than a dozen of those towels, found among the rags, were hanging along the running water pipe over the tin trough with taps above it. 
My personal towel, however, I brought from 13 Decemberists and kept it in the locker room hung on the heating pipe in the corner under the window.
I was afraid that if left in the washing room it would be used by folks as any other piece of garbage hanging there.

How did such a deficit come to my hands?
At some of my visits to the village, Raisa Alexandrovna appreciating my labor achievements about their hutta decided to pay in kind.
She presented me with a towel and a brand new briefcase.
A very nice towel it was, white and fluffy, not for the whole body, though, just for face and hands judging by its size.
And it had a blue squirrel imprinted in profile with a bushy tail, also very pretty.

Yet one day, coming back from the midday voyage to the remote canteen at the ‘Motordetail’ plant, I noticed that someone’s dirty hand had horsed around the tender squirrel in the corner.
Naturally, I kicked up some dust – what the f-f.. frivolities with my personal belongings?!
I had not picked my towel from the rags in the dirty garbage but brought it from home!
Everyone pointed at Ahmed.

Once again, in details, I explained specifically to him where the towel had been brought from and urged him to understand and never again, under no circumstances use it.
There were flocks of them hanging in the washing room were they not enough for him?
He apologized and said he did not a-know…

I had to take the towel back to 13 Decemberists and wash it on Monday.
On Wednesday, freshly washed and ironed, the blue squirrel was hanging as a banner of cleanly way of life in the corner of the locker room.

On a half-hour break, I was playing ‘goat' with jacks, when the locker room door slammed after the belated Ahmed. 
Murmuring some Tajik folklore tune he passed the table with the shaky dominoes line.
Vanya jabbed me into the side and pointed with his chin into the corner, meaning ‘look at the prankster!’
Ahmed meticulously, like the surgeon before operating on Lucy Mancini, was wiping his wet hands on the bushy tail of my squirrel.
But, by the sidelong glance from under the squint of his olive eyelids, I figured it out that he knew it as well as I did that he was no fucking doctor. 

‘Ahmed,’ said I and general attentive silence reigned in the locker room. ‘I see you liked the creature. I gift it to you together with the towel.’
‘Oy, I forgotta!’
‘Presents are not to be discussed. Take it, it’s yours.’
And I slammed two doubles at both ends of the bones line on the table top.

(...he did pay me back for that German poet with his letter-like seagulls after all, or maybe he did not forgive me ‘Ahmed’…)

A couple of presses were located outside the pressing section.
When I got the task of pressing waste paper with one of them it was like going out of the dungeon because the press was installed next to a big window.
And under the window, there were the baggage scales on which jack Misha checked the weight of the waste paper bales and said it to me. 
Then he dragged them straight to the hangar because it was two times closer than from the pressing section. 
That's why the weigher Valya gave me a pencil and said to keep the record of the waste paper bales kilos and at the end of working day hand the list in to her so that she would copy it into her ledger. 

That pencil made of me an incurable graphomaniac.
At first, I used it to write the columns of figures in the unfinished but discarded copybook of the fourth-grade student Lyuba Dolya, picked up from the hillock of waste paper. 
But then, under creaks and groans of the slowly creeping press shield, it suddenly wrote ‘The Landscape’ a short verbal picture with a puzzling end, all by itself.

I read that page from a schoolgirl copybook and saw that it was perfect. 
I liked it – not a word to be added or taken away.

‘The Landscape’ was followed with ‘The Still Life’ on the background of the winter and ‘The Portrait’ of the summer period.
Together with ‘The Pastoral', they composed ‘The Vernissage' of four paintings. 

But all that came later, because ‘The Landscape’ was just the pencil’s test of the pen, after which it started to write the initial dialogue of the summer piece ‘Sehryoga drenches horses’.
Later there came the winter, spring, and autumn pieces included in the collection ‘The Year Seasons’ of a certain writer Bidlyuk.

Of course, not all of those works were finished with the same pencil but they sprung from it.
The pencil put a spell on me, made me a zombie so that I kept it in my fingers while it went on writing line after line in other scraps of paper because Lyuba Dolya's copybook was soon over. 

(...at times it's needed so little for the magic to happen. 
Just think of it – an offal stub of a pencil…)

When ‘The Year Seasons’ pieces were finished, I wanted to see them in a typewritten form but felt strongly against going to the typist pool again, I don’t even know why.

In the one-room public library on the first floor of an apartment block in the Zelenchuk area, I discovered a typewriter with Ukrainian letters.
There worked two librarians a woman of retirement age and a fat girl with glasses, like a granddaughter of the senior lady.
Se called her ‘granny’ anyway.

My attempt at borrowing the typewriter met a cold reception.
They did not know what I was going to type, and the KGB was storing samples of text written with their typewriter.
The senior lady shared also that by an unadvertised rule they had samples by typewriters from all the city organizations.
Everything was extremely simple and logical, were I to type some anti-Soviet proclamations the organs in charge would find out at once whom to catch by the gills.

(...it’s nice to realize that you are protected by so prudent organs…)

Then I asked for permission to type one story directly in their room at the desk behind the bookshelves.
I would leave the carbon copy by them.
The lady shook her head in doubt but the granddaughter persuaded her to allow.

Oh, my! What a hard job it was!
It took me two days off to tap through one page and a half.
Poor librarians!
It should have fretted away their brains – my knocking out one letter after another with the clumsy index finger.

The end product was full of typos but the librarian girl liked it although she had never in her life heard the colloquialism ‘to drench horses’ and had to ask from her friends.

And I had to restore my relations with Zhomnir because once upon a time he proudly showed me a portable typewriter stored in his archive chamber.
He could not lend it me but, as a representative of the intellectual elite, was obliged to allow me solving my creative problems in his archive chamber.
And Maria Antonovna had been loving me all along.
That’s why I started visiting Nezhin again on weekends.

Zhomnir demonstrated the way of using all the fingers for typing with the typewriter.
Maria Antonovna was making a bed for me on the sofa in the living room.
I typed all night long and in the morning walked to the railway station for a cup of coffee.

At the daytime, I typed sitting on the tiny balcony. 
From the height of the fifth floor, I had a fine view of the green trees below and the red brick chimney of the stoker-house among them. 
I watched the pigeon flock tumbling in the sky and tucked another sheet of paper into the typewriter.
I like that way of life although at times I remembered that it was Nezhin and then the nostalgia welled up.
Rather, I did not forget where I was, not even for a single moment and the nostalgia retreated only before the clatter of the typewriter...

The final of the winter piece in 'The Year Seasons’ outraged Zhomnir.
‘Look! It’s ridiculous! How could a man be such a fool!’
And I rejoiced because he did not find faults with the language in my story but was indignant and argued with the character of the narrative!

As a payment for farming out his typewriter Zhomnir, for old time's sake, was passing English poems to me for translation. 
Kipling, Shelly, Frost. 
I was translating and bringing them back on weekends, but that does not count I still kept writing poems of my own kicked off... 

By the Soviet labor legislation, every worker in the USSR enjoyed an annual vacation.
In autumn I got it after slaving for eleven months at the recycling factory. 
I did not make plans where to spend my vacation.
I knew where exactly I was going.


