~~~ The Ivory Tower ~~~

Instead of a book of short stories by W. M. Maugham in Ukrainian (a single copy of 150 000 published) a weighty parcel firmly sat down on my shelves, dead as a doornail.
My part in the planned project was executed on all the points and that deprived living on of any further goal.

Life still rolled along the rutted track but already aimless and unplanned.
However, if you don’t ask the unnecessary question ‘what for?’, then a Thursday with the bathhouse and its steam room and subsequent two bottles of beer give enough motivation to live another week.
Look at Tibetan monks who rough it without even such stimulants.

In my, not quite Tibetan way of life, obviously lacked carnal pleasures.

I caught myself thinking this thought the evening when coming to 13 Decemberists after work, I cast the usual glance at the herd of shoes randomly crowded around the shoe shelf on the veranda.
The in-depth self-inquiry that followed, brought to the light that my eyes were trying to make out the high-wedge Austrian boots there.
Actually, it was not my fault that made in Austria footwear was so durable and unwilling to wear out from my memory.
Yet, what boots could come to the veranda in summer?
And what might she have come to Konotop for, let alone 13 Decemberists?
Such rhetorical questions helped to make me a laughing stock before myself but could not prevent nightly ejaculations.

In the dead of night, my sleep was interrupted because I threw my head back and dropped it sharply on the wooden armrest above my pillow in the sliding sofa. 
However, the pain and blood from the cut eyebrow did not obscure the fact of my underpants were soaked.
I took them off and used to wipe my loins and threw behind the other armrest by the wallpapered wall, they could sit there till the morning.
I turned on the lamp on the table, returned to the sofa and threw the blanket back.
Hell!
A dark damp patch blotted the landscape of the crimson tablecloth, which had long since lost its fringe and had become a sofa cover.

‘That’s right,’ said I to myself. ‘That’s exactly what you stole it for.’
Then I folded the cover so that the wet of the stain would not be felt and lay down to sleep the night through.

‘They are white spots for me,
The undecipherable black holes…
...and the quest lost its way in tornado-like whirling…
...splashing black seed drops on the white of the sheet...’

And it became hard to ride a tram in rush hours.
I did not mind being squeezed from all sides to resemble a concave diamond from a card pack, but when they press you against a gorgeous thigh of a young woman, that’s grossly unfair.
Damn!
And that's where you'd have a breaker-like erection which both your raincoats were not fit to hide. 
But there’s nowhere to retreat with the passengers pressed in so as two barrel-loads of herring into one.
All there remained for you was just to stand on, looking dejectedly out the window of the running tramcar, like, I have nothing to do with the thing.
But if not yours, then whose?

‘Blessed be the curves and bends
And other twists
In the railway of tramcars,
The accomplices of the sweetest touches,
Quite decent, and accidental almost...’

And all such things bring to sexual starvation, which the scientifically clever folks shortened to the term ‘libido’.
That damned Libido medicine is highly recommended to people of creative professions, like, to steeply raise the quality of their creations. 
But what the fuck was I to do with that f-f.. fabulous Libido?!
I was not Van Gogh, nor Walt Whitman.


That f-f.. faltering libido caught me up not only in public transport, or erotic dreams but even in the workplace. 
Only at work, the creative orgasm could be reached bypassing the stage of physiological erection. 

For instance, at the 100-apartment block finishing works an unfamiliar young plasterer looked very attractive to me.
Even a passing glance was enough to see, that the rural beauty was devoid of any intellectual pursuits, but the purity of the blush, the tempting outlines of her breasts and thighs (discernible even through the deforming spetzovka) disarmed and captured me.
I decided to gush up the Song of Songs of my own using the plasterer as a model.

Normally, the plastering works were started at a construction site after filling expanded clay over the floor slabs.
Expanded clay is a good thermal insulation material, but it crunches underfoot until it is covered with a screed at the subsequent stages of finishing works.
Turning a couple of times to my cautious steps on the expanded clay—I neared the doorway to make the details of the supposed masterpiece more precise—the model asked Trepetilikha who was plastering a jamb in the same room:
‘Maybe this one has stolen my trowel?’
‘Not a chance,’ replied Trepetilikha. ‘This one if even treads on your trowel wouldn’t pilfer it.’

Giving the size of my libido at that time, the new Song of Songs would have easily surpassed Solomon's creation and only the crude suspicion me in stealing saved the world literature from the upcoming reassessment of its values. 

‘From a high cliff, I dropped my libido 
Into the blue sea
And beheld as the blue sea
Drowned in my libido..’

Shucks!
Three stretches in Romny and two divorces did not leave even one chance out of a thousand for developing a serious relationship.
Would you kindly keep yourself in your straitjacket?

But you cannot lace up a blizzard...

Good news it was not whipping my face but pushing from behind towards the station in the early morning twilight.
Dense streams of snow in the squalls of the wind were turning the twilight back into the dark.
Knee-deep in snow drifts I was floundering along the supposed path by the railway track.
The concrete pillars holding the contact wire above the rails served the milestones not to deviate too much.
But it’s better not to look back – the blinding snow would instantly cling to the face.
And there’s nothing behind to look for – it had been and gone.

Just why did I see her naked body in the white churning foam of the madden blizzard?
And she’s not alone – having it with someone.
Not me…

I turned my face back to get slaps from the snow, to wake up and not see.
In my brain I switched on the splashes of the organ from the House of Organ Music, they were piercing and not precise, but distracted… 

Probably, I’m a pervert indeed – even from the love scene between my wife and no one knows who I fall into an erection midst this snowstorm.
What wife?
You do not have a wife!
Okay, not the wife – the love of the lifetime.
Shut up, asshole!
I shake my head in desperation and wander staggering on with a groan.

A hard strike from behind on my left shoulder called to order.
The local train from Nezhin was making its way through the snowstorm to the station.
The trains are always right they don’t have deviations.
Look, the blurred lights ahead, above the fourth platform.
From there in the common crowd to the station square where awaits our Seagull.
Everything’s fine, I’m just like everyone else...

In the late spring evening on the station square, someone had a breakdown. 

Maybe the heart wanted to take a break or something, but the man collapsed onto the asphalt.
However, the ambulance was quick and pulled up by when female ‘ah! oh!’ were still floating above the small crowd around the vacationer.

Going to the railway station through the Loony park, I missed the beginning and only watched the final act – the departing ambulance and dispersing group of people.
However, the pedestal of the Lenin monument was still sending back tiny echoes of ‘ah!' so reconstructing of what had just been there was as easy as adding zero to two. 

Along the alley opening to the square, one of the incident witnesses was thoughtfully nearing me strolling in the counter direction. 
When we get close to each other, she suddenly repeated the rehearsed ‘ah!’, threw up her hands, like in the Swan Lake ballet, and fell on me.
What else could I do?
Naturally, caught on the fall.
By the open armpits.
Then I gentlemanly dragged the half-fainted swan to the bench of green beams in the low wall of the trimmed bushes.

She sat silently with her head hung down, and I gallantly kept the silence going on in the thick shadow of a tree that blocked the light from the lamp in the alley. 
I sat next to her and inaudibly, in my mind, read out to myself on the uselessness of any advances with my pitch black and thoroughly soaked past, especially in the city where everyone knew anyone else.
When the mutual silence became too meddling, she put her hand on my shoulder, said in a weak voice ‘thank you' and left. 

I looked sadly after the light spot of her long cloak, which was moving away along the alley and I thought to myself:
‘Idiot! Couldn't hug the girl around her waist and leave to her the decision whether to put her head on your shoulder or say ‘don't!' and then leave? No? You're so smart and decided for both! Okay! Now stay with your fucking stream of consciousness, with libido and long nights like the princess on a pea!' 

‘Had an encounter with Katya in the park, dear?’
‘What’s the buzz, Natasha?’
‘Come on. Katya’s from our accounts department. She told me herself how she nearly fainted in the Loony and fell on you.’
‘She took me for someone else, or him for me.’
‘Don’t lie!’
‘Some lucky jackass. Katyas are falling on him in the parks!’

On a payday, I got off our Seagull at the bus station and turned into the post office to send 30&30 alimony. 
Then I crossed the Club street back and proceeded alongside the Loony park towards the railway station.
‘Hey! You’re from the Orpheuses, right? Ogoltsoff?

...a young man of my age, together with a woman, his wife, probably, making for the station too…
‘Yes.’
‘Do I know you! You studied in Nezhin and I knew your wife Olga!’

...no, I never met him, and my wife was known not only by him…

He looked around as if he was looking for another rock to knock on my skull with. 
Then he pointed his finger at his companion who stubbornly looked away.
‘See? Have got teeth into and having me in all the holes!' 

...yea, I see it alright, having it in all the holes…
...some antediluvian life, you are wandering around all in suffering and sorrows for the flute of Eera and they still pop up with the news on Olga… 

‘Okay. Say hello to my wife Olga.’
'Damn, you're some... fool driver!’

Leaving them to each other, I turn off the Club street into the park along the path leading to the Loony Palace of Culture, but bypass it to the right and behind the white monument of Lenin I walk diagonally to the side exit from the park, then past school eleven to the terminal of tram 3 by the Under-Overpass.

At the Bazaar stop, Skully and Vladya entered the tramcar.
‘Hi!’ I say. ‘How are you?’
Skully nodded warily and they also said:
‘Hi!’
The rumbling tram was driving us to School 13.
I gave a little chuckle.
‘What are you laughing at, Sehrguey?’ asked Skully with unprecedented correctness.

That’s some news!
For the first time in my life, he called me by my name, escaping my school, or labooh handle. 
Yes, and even with that pompous seriousness, like a lord-speaker addressing a peer from the opposition faction. 
“Ah… Just remembered Vladya’s verse.
Do you remember, Vladya? 
We were writing poems at the lessons.
I composed one where he was blowing the horn and clanging his sword in a battle with another knight.
So he produced an answer:

“But failed your calculations
And no more tries at putting on me
The wreaths of military glory.
As for the bugle, I wasn’t so horny...
I was then cozy and low in the ditch...”

‘Now remember, Vladya?’
He vaguely shrugged his shoulders and looked back and round at the rows of the seated passengers in so apologetic a way, that it was clear at once, he did not keep any memories of the sort.
Not to strain my old bosom friends any longer, I got off by School 13. 

On foot went I along the Nezhin Street, then the Eugenia Bosh street, and took the turn into the Kotovsky street.
My feet knew those streets by heart and I could trust them and, at leisure, think about this or that…

...the translator from ‘Vsesvit’ did a good job rendering the verses of that Chezh… how could it be done in Russian, I wonder?...probably…

‘I walk and smile to myself
And the thought
‘what would the passers-by think of me?’
Makes me laugh out loud...' 

...no, in ‘Vsesvit’ it’s better good fellow the translator but the Chezh is still a better fellow and in general Chezhs are good fellows…
...if we for instance take Jan from the Bolshevik…
...stop! no poking the Bolshevik’s ashes or else we’ll have another turn of plaintive weeping to irrigate with bitter tears the dry and petrified sponge which for a year already kicks back dropped behind the kitchen table…
...but this Chezh is really good he's shown them all how to make a poet's last will… 
...before him they produced just two-liners: ah, bury me so that in spring the nightingale’s song will sound o’er my grave… and me, please, where there the Dniper flow is heard from afar… absolute selfishness and consumerism… go and learn from the laughing Chezh… everything’s instructive and to the point… starting with the tree whose roots will suck the juice from me and pump it up right to the flowering twigs so that bees will collect the honey to grease the buns for young beauties when they drink their tea… that's the chivalry! he even postmortem keeps them on a special diet… I will feed them! says he, with delicacies!.. but it's not the Chezh Republic's fault… schizophrenia is supranational, indestructible and indivisible… although there are defectors, like Freud… they put their vision of the world in service to their own pocket and open a Viennese school… to keep the pot boiling… and with the fall of the curtain, after the life spent among neurasthenic ladies with their hysterics and naphthalenized spiders of scientistical doctors… did you not ask yourself the question looking into the mirror: well, what now, Ziggy, have your poles helped you?.. and you could have remained a normal schizo… free… but what is freedom and where its fore is and where the behind? As Peter Lysoon cares to put it… freedom from what? and here you get fixed up with the national traditions… for the Brit of Shakespeare it's freedom from time… the connection of times is broken describes he an ordinary clinical case… while in Ukrainian the very term denotes separation from God or else can be interpreted as some incognito ‘free divine' yet the existence of both freedom and God is beyond provability… but when feeling that the leash no longer holds – ahead! with frenzied rapture… still watch your step, it's good in the wild yet it's painfully chilly and wet… and here is the whole dirty trick: how to avoid the dictates necessary for keeping the herd safe and simultaneously enjoy the goodies of the in-herd lifestyle with a warm female next to your side and cool vodka from the freezer?.. more complex that the quadrature of the circle… 
what’s that? Decemberists street? so soon? some gag… Mercutio was lucky to have a friend like Romeo who would snap him back to earth in time ‘peace, f-f.. friend of mine, thou talk’st of nothing! look around or you’ll get to the Tsiolkovsky street in no time!”..
...what's that? why is Lenochka strolling in front of the gate?. 

‘Dad, you’ve got a visitor.’
‘What visitor?’
‘I don’t know, he says he’s your friend.'
I tinkled handle-latch of the narrow gate and went into the yard.

On the bench by the porch, looking up at the lower branches from the apple tree serving the backrest too, my visitor sat, aka my friend, blowing cigarette smoke up into the leaves.
‘Hello, Twoic.’
‘Hi, Hooey Pricker.’

He came by the local train from the nearby Bakhmach in the neighboring Chernigov region and had to go back by the last local in Kiev direction.
Before the departure, there was not too much time neither too little and we strolled to the station without hurrying. 
Along the way, we remembered the golden old time, Slavik and Petyunya. 
Twoic, in general terms, outlined their cases for the past period.
With a sad sigh, he admitted that knew that all had gone wrong for me. 

Well, and he meanwhile graduated and, following the appointment, became a Chemistry teacher in the village of Varvarovka, six kilometers from his home.
So an advantageous appointment of my friend did not come as a surprise for me – in the era of deficit Goods Manager of a district trading base (that's his mother's position) had levers more powerful than those of even the secretary of the district party committee. 

In the neighboring village of Varvarovka, at his workplace, everything was drowned in the moonshine and only a remarkable specimen, with genetic resistance to homemade alcohol thanks to Cossack ancestors, would have survived the constant submersion.
The periods between educating the school kids were filled with friendly bouts in Bakhmach with toughs of the district center, and by trips to Nezhin to have it with some of the eager whores in the student hostel. 

Village teachers were exempt from the army draft as well, as persons over twenty-seven-years old.
After reaching the specified age, Twoic realized that it was time for him to grow.

A professor at the Nezhin institute, who was kept fed with deficiencies from Twoic's mother trading base, made protection in some research institute in Kiev. 
Ph.D. student – each letter had its individual halo. 
To get into the graduate school by the research institute, Twoic was prepared to pray all the gods whatsoever.

The Nezhin professor brought his mother to the right person from the research institute and she held the necessary negotiations, but Twoic still went to the Vladimir Cathedral, where he offered a prayer and did not stint for a twenty kilos candle, but now, just in case, he showed up to me.

After all, I was that Hooey Pricker, the Hosty elite, the rising star of the English Department, the bearer of a blessing, like Jacob, like Joseph…

(...the devil only knows what blessedness is, but since Thomas Mann said it is around then, after all, it is…)

It looked like Hooey Pricker had a nasty nose-dive and splashed his blessedness, yet what if a drop or two had not spilled?
Let him sprinkle the remnants on him, Twoic.

About the drops, he did not say a word to me, and everything else, following the point of the giant candle, is grown in the hotbed of my feverish fantasy. 

In the end, Twoic went to his projects in hand and without excessive hesitation laid out his business plan, according to which I did not have anything more to lose while he had a scientific career ahead of him.
It only remained to get through the graduate school.
But, if lucky, there shined a decent jackpot.

In short, one, like, a business guy from Kiev wanted to buy a bag or two of hemp.
Twoic was reluctant to invite the guy to his village – what if he was an operative officer?
It’s better I would sell it in a place convenient for the transaction.

From the friendly offer, I felt somewhat melancholic, sort of. 
For political transgressions they gave forty-five stay in Romny, but how much would they dump for dope?
And they could make you sleepy forever too…
Yet, Twoic talked to the point, I did not have anything to lose as far as my Maugham plan was accomplished.
And I agreed.

On the second platform we exchanged a farewell handshake: let help you, Twoic, my sprinkled drops, if there was anything left.
Do your graduate school, the whole nine yards...

A telegram from Kiev put on the table:

"Saturday 12.30, metro by Railway Station, guys too." 

It was not signed, which meant it was my friend calling me.
My friend Twoic.

Any mail for me went to the shelves, but a telegram was received for the first time, and the text was somewhat conspiratorial.
That’s why they put it under the lamp on the table, for me to see when I’m back from work.
Since I I kept silent as a fish to all questions from my parents, Lenochka was entrusted with clarification.

I delivered answers with the evasiveness of the Delphic Pythias, feeling the growth of tension in the silent kitchen and the adjoining room.
‘You have a telegram.’
‘Very interesting.’
‘Already read it?’
‘What else do they do with telegrams?’
‘From Kiev? Yes?’
‘So it’s written here.’
‘And from whom?’
‘It’s not written here.’
‘Are you going?’
‘Going is not the must if you have a hang glider.’

Why was I showing off and making so much mist in the fog?
I didn't know another way to instill a taste for philosophical dialogues and playing with words. 
How else to reveal to her, a motherless girl, the eternal feminine secret: so that they wouldn't stop courting you, give without giving?

Usually, those word-wandering conversations were cut short by the fierce indignation of the kitchen: 
‘Not tired of the nonsense? Get away from him!' 

She was growing up a clever girl.
And knew how to maneuver, albeit still in naive, childish way.
No wonder though with the good training she'd undergone, especially from three to five when her mother disappeared suddenly and her father was popping up only on weekends to say ‘hi!' and go away to his friends. 
In the weekday evenings the drunk grandpa was snoring behind the wall and grandma, pissed that he had slipped away although at the end of working day they got to the RepBase Checkpoint together, and she had to go alone in overcrowded tramcars and trudge the bags alone along the darkness and snowdrifts of the outskirt streets, would scream at the small girl with threats to give her away, the disgusting wretch, into an orphanage. 
And it seemed to the frightened kid it was not her granny, but Baba-Yaga, the crooked witch, the mistress of the black blizzard which scratched into the ice-clad windows, and all of them were against her defenseless, five-year-old wretch.
Complain? To whom?
Wait for help? Where from?

So Lenochka learned to get along with her grandmother.
She knew when to hug and how to kiss on the cheek.
And granny brought her cakes with cream from ‘Cooking' store by the Under-Overpass.
Yes, and she sewed for her everything with the Singer sewing machine.

And what good things did she see from her dad? 
Coming from work he knew only to rustle with the book pages, and even bought a table lamp.
Well, there were also those thirty rubles a month, yet they were just thirty rubles to granny.
But the Granny insured her with insurance and when she is eighteen – here you are, Lenochka, get two thousand! 
And whatever you asked granny could cook.
She also knew all the gossip about her classmates and they always had something to talk about.

However, when you asked what's happiness, or, say, beauty, then daddy explained more interesting.
And he knew how to praise a new haircut so it’s ticklish with joy.
But all the same, Granny’s better...

My friend Twoic did correct calculations when appointing to meet at 12.30.
By that time the first local train from Konotop reached Kiev.
He did not consider one thing – my disgust to be put in frames worked out not by me.
So I arrived in the Mother of Russian cities two hours earlier, by an express train.

 Leaving the railway station I crossed its square full of tramway traffic clang and rumble and rings, and leisurely strolled along the inclined plane of an empty wide sidewalk towards the busy intersection of the megalopolis.

Half a dozen gypsy woman followed me into the first canteen after the crossing.
Removing my raincoat and hat on the hanger in the corner, I almost regretted the coincidence and that I would have to wait for the group to select their havvage and echoing to each other in their dark language pull their trays to the checkout.
Never mind, there were lots of time.

However, the gypsies took a wait-and-see attitude and, glancing at me, clearly refrained from going first.
And that’s a wise move too – a way to check what items on the menu were edible that day.

‘You’re missing bread.’ grumbled the cashier giving a look at my tray.
‘No need.'
With a shrug, she threw back a couple of beads on her abacus and accepted the worn out ruble.

Getting seated, I modestly stared down at the cabbage salad combined with a snack of custard cake.
I diligently tried not to follow the news announcer in his coat and cap, broadcasting from a nearby table, to feed the chewing companion the latest news of his world where the day before someone ate too much of noxiron and kicked the bucket.

The most appropriate dinner gossip.
Yet the most surprising thing that this metropolitan newsmonger word for word repeated the piece which already was no news in the provincial wild.
The crane operator Vitalya shared it a week ago.
Coincidence, or plagiarism?
Having intercepted my pensive look, the announcer swelled in vanity – the owner of a stunning sensation...

In the barber shop on the same street, there was no queue so when I returned to the station there remained half an hour before the appointment.

The shoe cleaner in a satin blue coat polished my shoes flicking the anchors tattooed on the backs of his hands.
Instead of staring at the ladies scurrying past his booth to the women’s toilet and back, I kept my look on the gray of his head bent to my knees.
The mujik got fed up with such an anomaly.
‘What are you gazing at?’ he asked, putting off his brush and taking a plush cloth instead.
‘I seem to like you.’
‘Bullshit.’ he grumbled grimly. ‘Even I don’t like myself.’
‘So we have different tastes.’
And all the same, there still remained fifteen minutes... 

I passed through the immense vestibule of the station, climbed up the white stone stairs to the second floor and up there rested my elbows on the wide white parapet over the grandiose hall that went up into the twilight filled height.
And I watched the messy Brownian movement confusion of the people particles down there on the tiled bottom.
About five minutes later, this tiny bit of me would mix with them, but now I was just looking down at the bustle.

Their hasty streams thinned at the center of the hall, and further on they again became denser.
The reason for the phenomenon was the athletic figure in a scarlet jacket walking in unhurried circles there.
Waiting for someone.
Whom?
Not me.
Nobody waits for me except for Twoic who, probably, right now is circling by the metro station in the waves of the passengers from the neighboring local trains station.

It’s funny.
In the center of the Central Station, this burly guy is spinning waiting for someone, a little lesser guy is circling by the nearby smaller station – Twoic, also in a state of waiting. 
If you extend this line, then somewhere still further, say, on a tram terminal, there is a teenager waiting for somebody.
And so on, just like that endless little man in a fire extinguisher on the staircase landing of the second floor of my kindergarten, the man in a cap who with his somersaulting pictures led me to the notion of infinity.

That kindergarten ‘I’ hadn’t even heard the word ‘infinity’, but infinitely gazed at the fire extinguisher and tried to understand: where did those men in caps go?
That zany kid is me, who replaced him, and I will be replaced by other ‘I’ and all we are finite unlike the little man in his cap...

Near the metro station, I rested my chin in the chest hiding the face beneath the brim of the hat. 
My friend Twoic walked along the line of telephones on the wall, to and fro.
He wore a newly re-established mustache, prestigious leather coat, thinning hair and a little unhappy thoughtfulness on his face.

There he turned and started back.
After catching up with him, I silently followed from behind.
At the end of the phones line he turned again right to my grin:
‘Hi, Twoic. And where are the guys?’
‘Hooey Pricker!’

He tilted his broad face and giggled with the characteristic Twoic's laughter followed by that same tight squint to snap the situation: what, how? 
After a cheerful hug, he let me go and started confused talk about Slavik and Petyunya who wouldn’t come.
From the local trains station, a new wave of fresh arrivals poured along the sidewalk and we backed to the wall. 

Twoic dropped development of shaky hypotheses about the reason for the absence of Chernigov representatives, asked me for a 2-kopeck piece and started spinning the disk of a phone, with an open pocket notebook in his grip.
It's better to have a dull pencil than a sharp memory, as running a KGB wisdom shared by their black-headed gallant. 

The crowd streamed past with their mesh bags, suitcases, packages, boxes, buckets, bundles of pipes, briefcases, backpacks, seedlings, cornices, bags and any other imaginable and unimaginable burdens, they hurried to the metro and to the stops of public transport of all types on the square, dashing casual looks at the pair of metropolitan tough guys. 
The one with the broad leather back spinning the phone disk should be the boss, and the other one with a tenacious gaze from beneath the lowered brim of the hat, a bodyguard.

And although not each one in the crowd knew such words as ‘boss' and ‘bodyguards' yet in the back of the minds they shared mutual respect to those two guys, at least for the fact that their backs were free of burden and they had where to call on the phone in the metropolitan city of Kiev. 
How could they know, the fluid crowd, that Twoic was an upstart in the city, and I was a nothing-at-all called in by his telegram?

And, by the by, where’s he phoning?
I had no idea.
And it did not matter, for I was just an instrument.
There’s always the one deciding everything for us and my business’s just to execute the orders...

Last year Twoic became a graduate student and now was on the straight path to Ph. D.
His scholarship was higher than that of mere students yet not enough for a big city life.

Okay, there were no problems with clothing because his mom controlled a trading base.
The issue of feeding was also solved, coming back from weekend visits to the native village Twoic carried ‘torbas’ tearing off the hands with their weight.
Yet, for all these blessings it was necessary to pay in kind – to tolerate the parental chewing his ear off with twits for a diffused way of life, and work all the weekend-long digging, manuring, hauling, pulling in the garden and about the hutta. 

Twoic had enough of health and strength to make sport of the household works.
And he especially liked carrying something weighty and bulky – armfuls, bundles, sacks with a harvest from the garden to the shed.
Raking muck up in the pig stall or from under the bull calf was not as pleasant yet also a familiar business.
Quoting the old priest from their village: ‘where there's muck, there's lard’.
However, the mom’s moans and lamentations about the Kiev whores who eat off and rob the goof of her sunny would drive furious anyone, even a saint.

That’s why Twoic needed ready money.
And where to get it, that’s the question.
To unload freight train cars as in the student years?
That’s below a graduate student level.

To play Preferans with the hostel neighbors?
The occupation for a more skilled workforce. 
Preferans is pure arithmetic, and Twoic had two years at mathematical special school in his curriculum vitae, and besides, the feel of whether a player was bluffing or had a really good hand. 
And, last but not least in Preferans, Twoic’s appearance of a naive nature boy putting the opponents off track.
However, the hostel was too shallow waters.
You rip them for a fiver once or twice and they start to shy you.
Everybody grows so awfully busy, no time for a pool at all.
But they go on playing between themselves.
Yes, behind the locked door of someone’s room, for a kopeck per a trick.
So mean misers.

However, somewhere, someplace there had to be the upper crust, the elite.
It’s the capital, after all.
Playing by candlelight, on the green cloth, with a freshly opened deck, and so that the trick was no less than fifty kopecks.
But how could you reach the upper crust without money?

So Twoic started to draw romantic plans about getting a jackpot...

The first plan of becoming a drug traffic baron in the cannabis market somehow withered by itself.
It was followed by a plan to make friends with some of the foreigners who flashed through the capital and develop a barter trade with clothes brought from outside the iron curtain. 
That’s when he called me to use as the operating end tool.
And from that time I entered into the service to Twoic on quite acceptable terms if you already don't care the f-f.. flick about anything at all. 

Prospective business with foreigners did not prosper either.

On the day of the attempt at the establishing a suitable acquaintance, on the Khreschatyk sidewalks sounded only Roman languages.
It was no use to approach such passers-by with my English of Nezhin make.
Two times Twoic hallooed me at different twos of Negroes in broad-brimmed hats. 
However, the targets in response to my cheerful ‘hi! let’s have a talk!’ shied, for some reason, and kept silent.
Probably, they had already experienced invitations ‘to go out for a talk’ at some Dance Floors.
I had to explain to my boss that they were Negroes from some of the former French colonies so English did not click with them. 

The futile hunt seemed to wear Twoic out, or maybe he decided to thick over some new plan, but my boss sat tightly on a bench in the University greens and allocated me two hours for the uncontrolled free search.

The task was not too attractive but I had to work off the grub, both consumed that morning (buns and Pepsi) and upcoming.
And, leaving him thoughtful on the bench, I did not shirk my duty in any way and kept the ears pricked up – would anyone utter a thing in Shakespearean parlance from any side?

On the Shevchenko Boulevard a group of neat men, passing the Vladimir Cathedral, referred to it as ‘cathedral’.
Might it be?. 
‘No,’ one of them explained in Russian, ‘we are speaking in Latvian.’

I felt fed up.
Okay, one more last try at ‘The Intourist' hotel and that's it. 

On the wide porch in front of the glass entrance, a big guy with a saxophone string on his neck asked politely what I needed. 
Some naive bulldog at the establishment.
How could I – a foreign tourist – possibly knew all those local dialects?
On an indulgent survey of the two-meter aboriginal, I without a word of comment went inside and turned to the left where the bar was. 

The inscription in English asked to pay in local currency only and notified that the current day of the week was a day off. 
Yes, it’s time to have a rest.
The massive-looking chairs by polished tables turned out very responsive and tremendously comfortable. 
Loyalty is rewarded, had I been shirking I wouldn't enjoy such a soft seat. 
Much better than the hard bench planks under Twoic.

At the far end of the bar, which was enjoying its day off, there loosely sat twelve she-apostles and their black-bearded Teacher with his fervent sermon of the truest truth.
What’s their language, by the by?
They should know better.
To Twoic I’d report coming across a delegation of Romanian poultry farmers.

At the next but one table from me, two German-like colorless girls exchange brief clues over their table, strenuously not looking in my direction.
Damn the f-f.. fundamental language barrier.
The chicks were clearly bored. 
It would be the manna for them to hear:
‘You’re cute and I’m cool and I have a friend named Twoic. Let’s kill the boredom in a party of four.’
But they wouldn’t hear that.
The language prison.
They’re locked up in their cell, and I in mine.
We don’t even look at each other as wise foxes ignoring unattainable grapes.
But they can chat at least among themselves, and I? 
Would I remain deaf and dumb?
‘An o’fooly nais plais,’ informed I them socially. ‘Ain’t it? Baat (with a slight sigh of disappointment) nahbady to have a tauk wid!’
Gallantly I nodded at their amazed gazes.
‘Bye-bye!’...

For the period elapsed since that time, the jackpot hadn’t turned up, yet Twoic liked to deal with me.
I was all ready, like a young pioneer, for anything and besides, I was a relic of his student life. 
So, after the first, the similarly brief telegrams followed – the name of the village and the date for me to come on a weekend.
It took half an hour to get from Konotop to Bakhmach by a local train, and then ten minutes by bus. 

‘What's the news about you each weekend getting on a train with flowers? Visiting you wife or what? But you're, like, divorced.' 
‘To visit a friend in the village. The flowers are for his mom and grandmother.’
‘And there are no flowers in the village?’

There were.
Yet much more than flowers there was work in the village.
For my arrival, a roof was there waiting, or the barn, or turning dirt in the garden. 
After the work, of course, moonshine – as much as you like and gobble up to your heart content.
However, without the flowers I’d be like a farmhand there and when with them I was a guest, sort of...

The Twoic's parental house stood on the village outskirts in a narrow lane named the Shore. 
The lane narrowness was not resulting from its layout but the density of fruit trees overhanging the fences. 
The house, of course, was called hutta, but in terms of quality, it was still a house. 
Between the gates and the hutta, behind a low palisade to the left, there was a well with water at just two-meter depth.
A pail chained to the winch with a tin roof above. 

On the right, there was the whitewashed brick wall of the building comprising anything – a summer kitchen, whose porch almost closed with the steps of the high porch to hutta's veranda, a garage for a car that still had to be bought, a tool store, a shed. 
However, the entrance to the barn was not from the yard but from the back of that building.

Passing between the two porches, you found yourself in the backyard with one more, wooden shed for goats, chickens, pigs, and anything else. 
Under the windows of the hutta there grew raspberry and then half a dozen of apple trees and still further the huge vegetable garden beyond which there stretched an even field to the distanced forest belt hiding the railway.
The collective farm did not use that field because of abnormally high subsoil moisture.
The folks on the Shore lived in a big way.

The house was headed by Raisa Alexandrovna, Twoic's mother, because of her husband, Sehrguey, for the most part, was busy with the housework and he was not up to chatter. 
Of course, if something really put his back up he could address his wife with a loud appeal to shut her yap up.
Then Raisa Alexandrovna would pause, bite her lower lip and act a dumb rural woman, but all that was a pure theatricality – in five minutes the phone on the veranda would ring up and they ask for Raisa, and not Sehrguey. 

Apart from domestic affairs, she ran the local politics, accepting several visitors a day, both on and without an appointment. 
Her favorite scenic image was that of a ragged woman all in troubles and worries, in a worn out jacket and her kerchief on the black hair and only the irony in the look of black eyes could hardly fit the disguise.

She knew how to artfully tie her kerchief, re-arranging its appearance several times a day.
The knot changed its position from the forehead to under the back of her head, to sometimes on the side—a gypsy style—depending on whom Raisa Alexandrovna was accepting.
For the current visitor (in his jeans, long hair and the beard like a hippie from Los Angeles) she unexpectedly got it tied under her chin.
Then Twoic said it was the young priest in their village.

The hippie priest left and in half an hour a Zhigulie car pulled by the gate and a young but very loud woman, who very much needed ‘a gown, eh?’, entered the yard.

Raisa Alexandrovna took her to the veranda and was humbly making her brains for at least forty minutes before sending away with a promise of ‘a gown, eh?'. 
She did not sell things at home, to accomplish the transaction the visitor had to visit the trade base if the negotiations had a happy end.

Raisa winked at us with Twoic after the retiring priest's wife, blithe Mother, and crossed her face with a thumb. 
Holy, holy, holy!
But then she decided that we had spent too much time playing cards on the porch stair and ordered us back to the garden to turn the dirt, or spread the muck, hauling it there in the pull-cart with its wheels getting stuck in the black soil, or to collect the corn ears...

However, when I and Twoic were erecting another barn of logs we were out of her jurisdiction – Sehrguey had announced a smoke break that’s why we were playing.

The food after work was not a havvage but a good rural grub on lavish fat, with dill aroma and light steaming above the plates and a bunch of crispy green onion on a dish, in fresh water drops.

The chef cook in the hutta was Grandma Ulya.
She cooked delicious things even with her one hand.
The other, long paralyzed, she kept in the pocket on the stomach of her apron.
She also was responsible for the moonshine distilling.
She liked watching the product’s drops dripping into the vessel set under...

I liked that kind of life more than laying on the Seim beach.
I liked the energetic one-legged neighbor Vityuk, the master of the game of the throw-in durak.
And even more, I liked Ganya, Raisa Alexandrovna's sister. 
There was no acting or irony in her.
She was calm and attentive and she understood everything.
I was sorry that she had cancer.
Doctors recently cut a ‘pea’ out and when she returned home her husband did not give her no peace until she showed him the fresh gash from the surgical knife.

I knew that she would not survive because when renovating the stove in her hutta all of the old firebricks turned out to be quite rotten. 
I was told to use the bricks again all the same – there was no other, but I could see that it was not for long...

They buried her in my absence, with heart-rending lamentations.
When they were taking Raisa from the cemetery, the rural old women shouted at her and other mourners:
‘So what? Cried out Ganya back? Returned?’

Twoic was very indignant telling me about such cruel brutality, but in my opinion, that was an ancient psychotherapy and one of the rituals in the continuous comedy of life...

In my next visit, the husband of the deceased was also sitting in the yard under the mulberry tree. 
At first, I did not guess where the sounds were coming from.
I thought a puppy entered the yard, but it turned out the widower burst into tears.
Such a burly man, a bus driver.
The tears flowed and he did not try to hide them.
If they all together could not call her back, what's the chance of you doing it single-handed?.

Ganya’s son, a guy about fourteen, was at war with Twoic because he fell in love with Twoic’s wife, but Twoic had divorced her.
Offended, sort of.
For me, it was a complete news that he got married and divorced. 
But Twoic said, yes, a Jewish girl from the Biology Department.

He also told that his father-in-law, when visiting people after vodka grabbed lard for a snack, sort of demonstrate that he was not from kosher holders.
Now the ex-father-in-law would raise Twoic's son as he pleased up to the making of him an Orthodox Jew under the most Ukrainian last name of all. 
And Twoic sighed at it.

Raisa Alexandrovna did not allow time for Twoic to grieve, though, and shouted from the phone in the veranda that he had to change into clean clothes because they were bringing an aspirant bride for the ‘evaluating look'. 
The loving mother did her best to find him a good party from among local girls which periodically were brought to the Shore.
Otherwise, the Kiev whores would bamboozle that zany of Twoic. 

He said inaudible ‘fuck!’ and went to change.
Soon behind the gates, a car was heard and a pair of parents led into the hutta their elegantly donned girl. 

I stayed alone on the porch of the summer kitchen, but then a visitor joined me.
Some old man bent literally into an arc.
When standing, he couldn’t see the face of a man before him, only up to the waist.

We started a slow talk and the old man confessed to me that he was once a young and well-proportioned rural clerk, sporting a military tunic and high boots.
The collectivization began and with the clerk's assistance, they were making lists of those to be exiled to the Siberia. 
Now he was not able to look into eyes of people around him.
And, after all, all was to no purpose.
The grandsons of the misers who at that time obtained the keys and seals of the village council were now penniless drunks, and the descendants of the robbed and exiled had returned from the Siberia and got prosperous again. 
Because on such a land only a lazy fool lives poorly.

He never waited till Raisa showed up and left, leaning on two short sticks, gazing at the sand of the road.

(...it turns out that the theft of a crimson tablecloth is not the worst thing that can happen to you, there are things for which you punish yourself more ruthlessly…) 

Then Sehrguey came up with a major project of paneling the hutta base with bricks. 
He had prepared them for several years already.
It took me three-weekend visits, as the hutta was not a small one.
Twoic was responsible for preparing the mortar and carrying the bricks.
We finished on a Saturday.
On Sunday morning I got up first and went out on the veranda porch.
My shoes stood on the second step with their noses directed towards the gate, although in the evening I left them exactly the opposite.

(...some signs I can read easily – ‘the Moor had done his job...’...)

I put my shoes on, walked out of the gate and, going to the end of the lane, turned to the forest belt because in its clearings a very slow freight train was clanging along. 
I strode fast and then ran and managed to jump on the brake platform of the rear car.

(...everything turns out as it should when you have read it right…) 

The freight train picked up speed and passed Bakhmach without stopping.
People at the railway station looked in surprise after it.
I was standing on the brake platform, happy and pleased with myself, and the wind was ruffling my hair, sort of a tramp by Jack London...

In the winter there were no works in the village and Twoic sent me a telegram only in April. 
We were turning dirt in the garden when his father brought the news about the Chernobyl explosion. 
The day was cold and windy, the gray clouds flew low.
Twoic started to talk about radiation but I did not care the fuck.
What’s the difference?
However, the wind blew from the east and it did not let the radiation to reach the village.
The clouds took it and carried as far as Scotland, to the laundry hung there on linen ropes.
Of course, the Scots then threw away that wash, so ‘Morning Star’...

But all that would happen later, and presently Twoic, leaning against the wall by the phone dialed the number and I gazed at the endlessly hurrying crowd which had no idea about the subtlety of relation between mafia bosses and their bodyguards.
And I tried to figure it out who of us was more interested in this friendship?
The would-be Ph.D. Twoic, or I, his genie from a bottle? 

It’s a dumb thing to do psychoanalysis having no idea how it is done...

In the pedagogical institute, they, of course, explained that it was some malicious insolent invention of the decaying West, degrading and belying capitalized Man which sounded proudly.
A sad pity, the lecturers did not share the essence and methods of that indecency.
So they left us with no other option but to invent the content for the headline ‘Psychoanalysis’ and make out the methods by ourselves.

Swing your arm, push your shoulder against it – we will start this bitch of a collider manually!

(...let’s say, the essence of the analysis is to answer the dirtiest of all questions – that of ‘why?’…)

So, why am I stuck with Twoic? 
What is the reason?
The healthy village food performed by his grandmother?
Absolutely, yes.
Carrying the flowers on a train, I look forward to enjoying the meals.

Besides, there is one more bait which I try to reach with no chance of getting it, like the ass of Till Eulenspiegel.
For any ass, you can find a kind of grass he will run after like a good little boy. 
So which one am I after?

The wild descriptions of sex feasts generously shared by Twoic keep glowing the embers of hope that I, the loyal servant, will get some crumbs off the master’s bed.
Say, some slut girlfriend of another whore.
The desire still remains unfulfilled but who's ever said the ass should ever reach the grass? 

It’s a smart ass and he doesn’t give even a sidelong glance at the bunch of grass dangling in front of his nose.
He pretends not seeing it even point-blank, and he trots after it just so, for the sake of warm-up, because he adores physical exercises and other agricultural work.
However, to see what an ass is up to you don’t need to be as wise as Solomon...

Actually, there was an attempt in tune with ‘girlfriend’s girlfriend’.

They came from Nezhin to Bakhmach, the ex-lover of Twoic and her girlfriend.
Twoic and I met them and took to the village by bus.
Two mattresses were spread in advance over the dry hay in the loft above the summer kitchen.

Out of delicacy, Twoic took his ex-lover to the nearby grove leaving the whole loft for my free use.
The chick was appetizing – slender and busty but she undressed only down to pantyhose. 
No doubt, a pretty looking item, that black mesh on her legs, but what the fuck I needed that mesh for?
The old acquaintance of a dirty trick – welcome on top, no horsing with the chastity belt.

I did not try at tearing the pantyhose to shreds, and all attempts at stirring up a reciprocal flame of passion in her fell flat.
The stalemate was sustained until Twoic brought back his ex-lover from the walk to the grove... 

The next morning I got up first and went for a swim in ‘kopanka’ – a pond of about fifteen meters, dug in the field by an excavator.
When I returned, Raisa Alexandrovna was sitting on the veranda porch.
‘So how was the water?’ asked she with the hint in her squinting black eyes.
‘Cold,’ answered I in all the senses.

After breakfast, already without Raisa, Twoic asked directly:
‘Well, how?’
‘No hows. We’re incompatible.’
‘How that?’
‘She wanted being raped, I wanted to get a shared pleasure. The things just did not click.’

So, all that keeps me on Twoic’s leash boils down to the needs of my stomach, and that of the reproductive organ and… and?.
We need something else here, thinking in just two dimensions is somehow not quite a Hegelian way… 
Where is the third?! Speak!.
Aha! Here it is – the brain.

The brain with its spiritual needs.
It needs so badly to pour out the knowledge stuffed inside. 
In order not to burst in all directions.
It’s such a torment – to have pearls and no one to spill them in front of.

(...who would refuse to assume the role of a Mentor?
Passing the pearls of wisdom to a naively gaping youth…)

Twoic presents me with such opportunity by his questions.
How to choose the right trail in the jungle of a research institute laboratory squabbles where each spider is for himself and the jar is one for all?
Who’s more useful for a scientific career – a talented but alcoholic micro-chief, aka the manager of the laboratory, or as dull as a felt boot yet macro-chief, aka the head of the institute department?
Whose servant to become?

Answering these and similar questions, I was amazed at the vast reserves of my Machiavellianism. 
I wouldn’t ever dream of so huge resources, communication with Twoic helped to discover this my side.

However, the essence of my maxims is so simple that Twoic senses it himself and follows in a natural way.
It’s only he can’t put it to words, that we come to this world when everything is occupied already – ‘the house’s sold out!’ – which makes our goal snatching a place under the sun for our dearest selves, and the end justifies the means...

Twoic is all too happy to agree.
But what about me?
Do I live by this sermon?
Do I follow it, do I eat it out?

(...and following your own theories is not the must.
Nietzsche, the inventor of the superman in the form of a ‘blond beast’, was himself a physically miserable nuisance.
‘Snap a place under the sun for yourself,’ teach I, that’s true.
However, as for me, I’d rather go away in search of another sun than mix into their scrambling crowd…)

So, are you happy with your self-psychoanalyzing?
Got all the nooks turned inside out?
Don’t be shy, we are alone – Twoic’s too busy with dialing and checking his notebook.
So, is that it?
The orgies for your stomach, the looking forward to getting a second-hand whore, and the tickling of your vanity by spilling intellectual pearls?
Am I with him because of these reasons?

Well, that’s why, yes…
And also because of the feeling of freedom, when I break to all that out from the routine of my ordered, polished, trampled way of life with a bath on Thursdays, washing on Mondays, ironing on Tuesdays, with the beach or reading room on weekends and the ever-present feeling of shortage and emptiness, and constant being on alert… 

I see, now you flashed with your love for freedom.
Wow, well done! 
And that’s, hopefully, all now?

Of course, yes, is all that not enough for a friendship? 

Don’t try to cheat the dialectics.
You forgot the opposite force – hatred.

And why should I hate him?
He feeds me, provides drinking, presents an outlet to escape…

And add the opportunity to practice in masochism, eh?
What is bliss if not sweet pain?

...had he slept with her or not?.. everything in me contracts into a tight tangle then painfully-sweetly dissolves in whining: it cannot be.. but if?. and again the pain followed by spreading warmth: no, no... 

In one of my first visits to the Twoic's village, on a late windy night, we were sitting at a bus stop on an empty wide square. 
The whitewashed walls of the stop and planks of the benches were stamped with inscriptions and cuts of all kinds of Deep Purples, Dynamos, Svetas, Blitzes, Vovas, and lots of dates. 
Twoic suddenly spoke of Eera.
‘She said she never had it with anyone better than with you.’
The compliment, sort of, scalped me.

They do not come up with such confessions at the table in a cafe.
For such a topic, you should lie together in one bed after having a sex.
Did she count on Twoic someday would deliver these words to me and I recreate the whole picture?
Or out of feline inclination of females to scratch the fucker?
That’s why he reached out to take a cigarette of Belomor-Canal…

Don't succumb to complexes, Twoic, I've never been a sexual giant. 

He somehow felt that he had blurted out a bit too much and, to efface it, started swearing that he had never in his life had anything with Eera…
As if I asked him if it was so.

(...as you pretend to be a stupid ass for too long then at times you become it…) 

‘Did you ever beat her?’ asked he a little later.
Oops, so she shared about that slap too.

‘I hit just once, at the final date,’ reported I, ‘but quite lightly, solely for compliance with the protocol.’
Twoic laughed with his trademark laughter...

The next morning we went for a swim in ‘kopanka’.
I did not want to go in the water, so I walked around the pond and lay on the beach.  
Twoic swam it from end to end.
Some bluish satisfaction was melting in his blue eyes when he came ashore beside me with water trickles dripping from his trunks.
‘This look was in his eyes when getting off her,’ thought I.
The thought brought the pain. 
Less, then I expected, more, than I would like...

She approached me on the beach and started talking about ‘Morning Star’ that lay on the sand next to the pink blanket on which I was sitting.

Did I really read it or that's such a bait for girls? 
What was written in, say, this article?

I had to tell her that it was about a 19-year-old boy, a member of the smugglers' family...

They regularly flew from Pakistan to England, after swallowing a heap of small cellophane packages with drugs.
Stomach was an ideal storage cell, no trained dogs at airports could sniff anything out.
Upon arrival at a safe house in London, the whole family underwent the stomach lavage and –rah-rah-rah!—another batch was delivered.
The fizzle happened during the flight when one of the small packages burst in the stomach of the young man.
They used to tamp too much into a package and the guy was taken from the airport straight to the hospital with a severe overdose.
They washed the drugs out of his stomach and saved his life.
And that was the end of the family business.
Some sad, in general, a story.

She sympathized and shared that she was also a nurse.
A good profession, actually, for a girl about thirty.
She did not look like a movie star, yet everything else was in place.
My trunks could witness for that.
When finishing the story I had to pull my knees up to my chin so as to go on sitting like a civilized gentleman and not a heated gorilla in the zoo. 

And then everything went on like in a fairy tale, she told me her address in the At-Seven-Winds and we agreed that on Tuesday I come to her with a visit of friendship and mutual understanding. 
She went away along the sandy beach, and I had to stretch out on my stomach so as not to attract the public attention with my swimming trunks sticking out on the occasion of the promised Tuesday.

The day came at last and after work, I drove from the station square to the city center. 
In ‘The Flowers’ shop there was nothing to my liking.
I had to buy some kind of a cross between daisies and sunflower. 

There still was a lot of time until the appointed hour and I walked back to the station and then along the Club street to the At-Seven-Winds.
In the Zelenchuk area Vladimir Gavkalov, a driver of a truck crane from the SMP-615, who looked like Eera’s brother Igor, crossed my path.
‘Sehryoga!’ yelled he on the run, ‘You lost your way! The bathhouse is in the opposite direction!’
I did not like the bouquet myself but still continued to carry it. 

Up to the At-Seven-Winds I, all the same, reached half an hour ahead of the schedule and decided to fulfill my long-standing promise to myself that someday I come on a visit to that family of birches in the vast area of construction sites. 
Following the trail trod in the tall grass, I approached the group of the white-trunk beauties. 

Bitches!
The tenants from the nearest street had arranged a garbage dump under the trees.

The sun clenched between the clouds went down without a sunset.
In frustrated feelings, I carried my stupid bouquet to the address.

‘Oh!’ she said. ‘With flowers!’
And I got it at once it should have been vodka.
Then we chattered about nothing in the kitchen of her one-room flat. 
After tea there happened an incident – the big jar of strawberry jam slipped from her hands and slammed to the floor. 
It took her a long time to collect the large sticky puddle and wash the floor.

At about eleven she started sending me home.
I had to drive a fool that there everything was already locked and latched and the wolfhounds set free to run around.
She, like, took pity and yielded me half of her double bed on the condition that I would behave.

When she put the light out and lay down too, I attempted to continue the relationship in the most natural way but met a stubborn resistance. 
I will never learn nothing!
Did she invite me to demonstrate her chastity?

I stopped trying and felt I didn't really care, just like with that sealed post package on my bookshelves.

Or maybe she was shocked by the loss of jam.
A three-liter jar would have seen her through half a winter. 
Probably, an ominous sign for the superstitious.

And I do not care that they’ve arranged that dump there.
When from the consequential construction site, I watched them waving at me, it became somewhat better.
Like a promise of something beautiful.
When they cut them down and replace with a five-story block, they will still wave to me their reedy tops through the heat haze.
That will stay with me, and the garbage heap will remain to those smarties...

In the middle of the night, I woke up because of cautious fingers feeling my dick through the underpants. 
The nurse, who did not get raped, was checking why so. 
She’d better ask the sand on the Seim beach.
But those frisking fingers of strangers checking my flesh…
It had already been somewhere…
Only I couldn’t remember where and when and I fell asleep again.

In the morning I left, omitting the proposed tea with sugar.
What was her name?
Well, er, perhaps, somehow like, maybe.. m-m-m... yes.

The dance floor in the city Central Park was all still left to me.
Actually, I visited it not as a belated shooter in search of the game but simply to get blues. 
A session of nostalgia at a price of 50 kopecks.

I was one of the first to enter the fenced circle of the dance floor and sat down on the beams of the bench running along the high fence of pipes in peeling paint.
The large black boxes of the loudspeakers on the stage raged with good records.
The ‘live’ music had sunk into the past.
Between the numbers one, so to speak, DJ switched the mike on and announced what had just been played and what was coming next.
Sometimes, he tried to make a ridiculous joke.
Fortunately, not too often.

I sat quietly resting the back of my head against the iron pipe of the fence.
The evening twilight was thickening around but high in the sky the flocks of swallows still fluttered under the clouds touched with the parting sun rays.
Just like on the day when you turned one month old and we brought you for a checkup in the children’s polyclinic in the carriage covered with tulle to threw the evil eye off.
Only those swallows kept chirping shrilly when circling above the roof of the department store, and the swallows under the fading clouds were not heard because of being too high.
Then the sky became dark, the night came, and I still sat on the bench and never danced, because of I knew my place.
It was among other thirty-and-over-years old, outside, under the lamp in a park alley.
You could stop there for several minutes to watch the jumping next generation and go back to your life with a sofa in front of the TV.

I sat quietly like a foreign particle, listened to music and watched point-blank the young stock mass getting denser in front of the bench.
That girl’s neck’s longer than Nephertiti’s.
Very nice.
Like a dandelion's stem.
And I admired it without getting aroused.
She did not show up for a couple of weekends and when she came with a guiltily drooping and seemingly shortened neck, I knew that she got cut off at the entrance examinations to an institute.

At eleven, in the general crowd, I left the park for the tram stop by the Peace Square.
Those who lived closer diverged from the stream in pairs and companies.
People who lived in far away city parts discussed: to wait or not to wait? 
Trams at that time of day were an avis rara.

Once at the stop, we were met by a glass-eyed mujik of about forty. 
He was boring the approaching youngsters with a scornful stare, resting his palms on his buttocks, in the pose of a Nazi officer at the gate to the death camp, over which the inscription ‘Forget all hope you who come in here’.
The scared pairs and small companies circumvent him and timidly crowded on the other half of the long stop.
He victoriously triumphed in the conquered living space.

I stopped in front of him, barely two meters away.
So, Sturmbahnfuhrer, a duel of attitudes, eh?

Mine came all of itself, from the newsreels of the Victory Parade in Moscow, 1945.
There, besides the dumping fascist banners to the Lenin Mausoleum, are footages of filmed civilians.
Girls for the most part, with so sad faces.
Almost all of those girls from the past have the same pose, with their left arm let hang along the body they bend the right one across the stomach to grip with its hand the inside of the left elbow.

I repeated the pose standing against the glass-eyed.
Only my right was clutching higher than by the sad girls: around my left biceps.
As the result, the hanging down left arm already looked like a trunk, sort of.
The opponent was not fit to withstand even one minute.
He sadly dropped his head, clasped his hands behind in the zek grip and started to walk in small steps across the width of the stop, as far as the walls of the invisible cell let him go.

The young people were amazed at the ease of my victory over the cockroach and they began to fill the whole stop, taking note, for the future, that know-how is power.
In fact, my deed was a pure improvisation, a gift from my generation to theirs...

Over and over again, as always, with clattering wheels and shallow swaying, the local train carries me away from Konotop…
But where, by the way, am I going?
Taking into account the ink darkness outside the window, no further than to Nezhin. 
So on a visit to Zhomnir.
My reflection, blurred in the double-glazed window, dimly nods in time with the rhythm of the tapping at the rail joints: yea-to-him-and-no-where-else…
Why do I go there?
Well, probably, there is some reason… 
To type with his typewriter another story, or maybe a couple of verses…

(...how can I now recollect from such a distance?..)

But all that's a sheer smoke screen, and no use to tell lies to oneself. 
In fact, I am going to, again and again, feel the aching longing for the lost irreversibly. 
I am going to torture myself on the bank of the invisible river, the same very river which an eternity ago splashed a trickle where I loved and was loved in response… 

That's why the train rumbles along, through the night, and in one of the cars I am sitting on the edge of the three-person seat, with my briefcase in the middle of it basking impudently. 
It's a rare occasion when the car is empty. 
Well, or almost empty.

About twenty meters from my place in a seat on the same side from the aisle a girl is sitting.
She rides backward with her face to me, resting her head against the black window glass. 
At such a distance I cannot make out the features of her face, it’s just a girl, alone in an empty car of a night train with the bob haircut of blond hair.

She does not care about my presence.
She looks quietly through the window, where the picture of nocturnal darkness is sweeping past behind the dim reflection of the lamps in the ceiling of the empty car. 
Of course, it is empty.
I am of no account, I sit quietly in the distance and do not stare at her at all.
My absent gaze is directed along the passage into the empty car vestibule behind the glass of the sliding door, trembling and quaking.
Which, of course, doesn’t prevent a sentimental corner of my eye from catching the outline of her blond head and the part of her shoulder visible above the set of the seat backs separating us.

Just two in an empty car rushing through the night…
But—lo!—she wakes up from her sad stupor.
The right hand touches the hair of her blond haircut.
She turns a bit deeper to the window, demonstrating her profile and then looks straight ahead with her face turned to me.
I can’t see from my place where exactly her eyes are directed, but I don’t need anymore to show interest in the empty vestibule.
Now I look at her and admire, with platonic frankness, the face turned to my side and her shoulders covered with a cloth of the cloak.
That’s all I can do; I will not let her down with too daring jokes or suggestions, like:
‘You’re cute, I’m cool, be my third wife...’
But – ah! – she’s nice!
Even at this remote semi-discernibility…

The clatter of the wheels fades into the background, the beautiful melody by Tariverdiev from the film ‘17 Moments of Spring’ replaces the noise.
It’s when the secret agent Isaev, aka Stirlitz, has a meeting with his wife, arranged by the Center at an inconspicuous cafe in Germany.
She sat down three tables away from him so that he could admire her after ten years of separation. 
How’s she in the already unknown to him USSR?
But he swept away all the unnecessary in that moment thoughts and looked stealthily, inconspicuously, at the new features of the almost half-familiar woman.
More!
Oh, more!
No.
The escorting her another Soviet secret agent sitting by her side looks at his watch. 
The meeting is over.
He takes her away so that the bloodhounds of the Gestapo won't be able to run them down… 

But here, in the car, Tariverdiev's melody does not abate, we are out of their control, alone... 

BRENNGG! ZPRTYCH !!

From among the leatherette backrests between us, like from a slightly sloped deck of cards, a red joker jumps out.
We were not alone!
That drunk has been sleeping between us all along!
His swollen with hangover red mug semaphores:
‘The remote flirtation is over!’

Oh, gods! How I was rolling in the aisles!
Without restraint and stops.

The wretch with a cloudy misunderstanding watched my convulsions, looked back at the girl and walked unsteadily to the vestibule, and then to the next car.
His delicate nature revolted against traveling in the car with screaming horses. 

Do you are right, drunk!
To each his own.
And it’s high time for me to wipe the slobber from ruminating the same mawkish bubble gum…

When Brezhnev died he was buried in an ugly way.
Two mujiks in black mourning armbands simply dropped the box into the hole by the Kremlin wall.
Who watched the ceremony in the broadcast, without cuts for the news program ‘Time’ were just shocked.

The death of Lyonya with his smacking when talking, love for gaudy orders and triple kisses, became a test for the Soviet population.
For almost twenty years, people got used to life if poor and full of shortages, but without Stalin’s mass repressions, and without the shooting of hunger riots by military units as under Khrushchev...

Coming out of the bathhouse late Thursday evening, I personally saw how confused were people, collecting in more dense crowds and looking around for a shepherd.
I recollected the documentaries where big men in officers shoulder straps burst to pieces in weeping fits on the death of Stalin.

And at 13 Decemberists, sort of for fun but with underlying fear they constructed a paper wall to ward off the upcoming unknown.
The material used was all kinds of scrolls of honor awarded to the family members throughout its existence. 
They were picked up in a row, one by another, along the wood slat that kept in place the oilcloth substituting tile paneling on the kitchen wall. 
I would never imagine there was such a plenty of those certificates.
Starting from the sideboard next to the window they hang up to the washstand by the door to the veranda.
The scrolls of honor received for excellent studying in the third grade, for the second place in the pioneer camp draft tournament, for taking part in amateur performances were serving now a breastwork against the future.
I only shrugged.
What’s the difference?

After Brezhnev there followed the leapfrog of mummies, which came to power for three or four months and the population had again to switch off their TVs for three days because there was nothing on except for stiff quartets of chamber music and the news program ‘Time’ reading out telegrams of condolence from fraternal parties and international leaders.
That’s what mourning is for.

But now, after another funeral, a certain Gorbachev got to the steering wheel, quite a middle-aged, to cut the spree of classical music on TV, although with a suspicious stain over his bald head. 
He began to make speeches about acceleration and reconstruction, with Ukrainian pronunciation of the sound ‘g’.
Well, let him talk if so is his pleasure, who cares? 

However, the year before the moment reached in this my letter to you, he issued a decree with a long title, and, in short, introduced the Prohibition, aka ‘dry law’.
That move showed immediately that he never read John Mill in his life.
There it stands black on white, that only those governments resort to the like measures who consider their own people to be juvenile sillies.
That’s like push the latch on the door and say:
‘You’re not going anywhere today.’

That was more than I would bear and on the day of the Prohibition coming into force, I got off our Seagull by the grocery store in the At-Seven-Winds.
There I bought a bottle of wine and drank it from the neck without getting out to the street. 
That’s how I expressed indignation with the ‘dry law’.

Some of the saleswomen began to squeak that I should be grabbed and the militia called but in the queue, there were no supporters of the law-abiding project. 
I dropped the empty bottle gently into the bin on the sidewalk outside the grocery store.

With tram changes, I reached the terminal in the Settlement, although it was not an easy task. 
After ‘Vsesvit’ at the midday break and no snack in the grocery store, the wine did not behave well in the stomach.
I could hardly keep it under control on the way to 13 Decemberists, where I threw it up and down into the spill pail in the veranda.
My mother, appearing from the kitchen, screamed in fright:
‘Kolya! He’s throwing up with blood!’
My father also went out to the veranda, but getting the whiff of a familiar scent, waved her fears off:
‘What blood? Don't you see? Zonked like the last scumbag.' 

I covered the pail with its lid, changed from my shoes into the slippers and silently passed by to fall onto the sofa without any comments that being first or last made no much difference in a series of scumbags.

Before the Prohibition, I was a very moderate drinker. 

My weekly dose of alcohol was the two bottles of beer after the visit to the bathhouse, but Gorbachev with his ‘dry law’ literally brought me to that excess.
Sure enough, the weeks were not absolute replicas of one another.
There happened more liberal weeks when the bricklayers of our team shared with me wine brought to the trailer.
But they did not bring it each week, and sharing also was not the dogma.

And that’s because of the principle with which I returned from the business trip to Kiev.
There I had a discussion with one young superintendent.
We considered the case of a worker lying, purely theoretically, on the ground next to an unfinished, say, trench.
The young theoretician claimed that the jack was just bombed and that’s the only possible hypothesis.
My counter-argument was based on the fact that the man had his spetzovka on and hence he had just fainted because people do not drink at their workplace. 
Of course, I knew perfectly well that they drink anywhere and with anything on, but at that moment, for some reason, I was inclined to assume the idealistic standpoint.

On my return to Konotop, when I was offered a drink in the trailer, I continued the stance of a fighter for ideal and declared that I did not drink at work, although I wanted it.
There followed a reasonable argument, that the trailer was not the workplace.
I had to make corrections to the principle wording and it ended up as ‘I do not drink in work clothes’.
Then they offered, in a form of a compromise, to change into clean clothes, have a swig and then change back. 

In the course of time, the procedure was reduced.
I simply got undressed in my underpants and tank-top, fuddled, just to be polite, and put my spetzovka back on.
In our team, the principles were treated with respect and I was tolerated even in such negligee.
Only the crane operator Vitalya used to explore and lose his temper:
‘Why share with him? He'll peach us!' 
‘No, he’s not a snitch.’
‘When the superintendent drops in and sees his underwear, can't he get it what we are up to?' 
But the crane operator was not a member of our team and Vitalya wasn’t even a Konotoper.
He came to work from Bakhmach, and just had that sort of a frantic temperament.

Once at the midday break he started to make fun:
‘Got stuck again in that ‘Vsesvit’ of yours? Come, have a drink! But don’t undress, I also have principles.’
He giggled, gaily flashed his eyes, grabbing the bottle with his hand missing a finger, and poured only for himself and Kyrpa...

One good turn deserves another.
For the next midday break, I bought a bottle of ‘Golden Autumn' and a bar of chocolate from the grocery store. 
Vitalya and Kyrpa were playing cards in the trailer.
I slowly undressed to the underwear and started sharing to the colleagues an exalted example of the sybaritic attitude to life by taking desultory sips from the bottle for 1 ruble 28 kopecks and nibbling at the expensive chocolate.

(...it was not a revenge at all, but pure pedagogy…) 

Vitalya kept himself in check for quite a long, but eventually, his temperament took over: 
‘Fuck! Snacking the mutter-mumbler swill with ‘Alenka’! What a pervert!’

But that, of course, was out of envy – in all his life he never tried it that way.
And I calmly drank the whole bottle and did not share it even with Kyrpa, who was backing Vitalya’s giggles the day before.

(...however, at times, some doubts creep in – was it really pedagogy or, after all, vengeful exhibitionism?..) 

On Thursday I stayed in the steam room a little longer and left the bathhouse at past seven.
Before the rule of Gorbachev, I would not even notice it – the blissful do not follow the time flow – however, the Prohibition placed the sale of alcohol in the rigid temporal frame. 
But my after-bath quota?!

In the beer bar on the opposite side of the square of Konotop Divisions, instead of the usual bright radiance of the fluorescent lamps, a misery yellow spot of a single bulb was seen inside. 
In sad distress, I was passing by, when noticed that the door of the bar opened and two men climbed down the high porch of the facility. 
Well, well, well!
The situation called for closer inspection.

The unlocked door subdued willingly to the light pressure.
And indeed, just one 100-watt bulb was lit inside above the beer tap.
Yet beer was still flowing from the tap into glasses!
Men were grabbing them and retreating to the high round tables.
If not for the scanty illumination, everything was like in the old good dry-lawless times!
Not everything, however.
The noise and din of warm friendly conversations were missing.
The barman in a white coat kept warning over and over again from behind the counter:
‘Keep quiet, mujiks! And be quick, we’re being breaching it.'

There's no buzz in the booze under the whip-clicks of a stopwatch...

Here, in the murky half-dark dungeon room, where you couldn’t make out the face of a man at the table opposite, we were like the last handful of Knights Templar after their order was defeated and announced anathema.
We hid there from the alcohol-free spies and informers.
Any low-grade trader could point at you and yell:
‘Hold him! Call the militia!’
We were outlaws...

Honestly, I do not really like beer bars.
You stand in line and watch how tipsy scumbags approach those ahead of you:
‘Bro, and a couple for me, eh?’
And instead of one line, you stand, in fact, two or three. 
Even more disgusting, when the tap is really near, you get a push on your side and a guy who you, like, have seen someplace, giggles and winks at you: 
‘Don’t forget? I asked three mugs.’

No, next time I'd rather go to a cafe where they sell only bottled, more expensive beer, but without those impudent on-tail-fallers. 

And on the following bath day Thursday I haughtily passed by the beer bar and stomped to the cafe.
‘We’ve got no beer.’
Damn.
Okay, let’s go to the Peace Square.
But in the cafe next to the cinema there also was no beer.
The railway station restaurant remained the last chance.
Same story.
But it’s Thursday!
So I was made buy a bottle of white wine.

The tables in the restaurant were big, for about ten persons each, surrounded by heavy chairs in leather upholstery, but with almost no guests.
I took a seat somewhere in the middle of the hall and started to pour wine into a glass as I would do it from a bottle of beer – in a knitting-needle-thin trickle. 
So was my habit.
After the first glass, I was approached by some mujik of an indeterminable occupation who asked for permission to sit nearby.
A whole hall of vacant tables and he liked this particular one.
Well, I did not object.
Landing into the next chair he began to state that he was in transit from the city of Lvov.
I answered that Lvov also was a good city, welcome in passing, and all that.
And I started to fill the following glass.
With intent stare at the thin trickle, he announced that he had just been released from the zone.
A couple of guys at the next but one table stopped their talk.
I congratulated him on being free at last and drank.

His face was suddenly distorted with an expression of unfigure-outable malice and he went over to loud threats to have an intercourse with my rectum when two of us would be in the same prison cell.

(...all that, of course, in more straightforward terminology…)

The wine was finished off, the neighbor on the table obviously did not like me, and I got up to leave.
One of the guys that were sitting nearby, was already standing between the tables.
‘Bang the bitch!’ he said to me. ‘What are you waiting for? We’re in!’
An absolutely unfamiliar guy.
Probably, he had a fit of patriotism.
‘You did not get it,’ answered I. ‘He’s not local. The hospitality law does not allow for crushing the bottle on his head. When on a vacation I’ll go to the city of Lvov and check what problem makes the travelers from there so impolite.’

I do not know if the guy understood my lengthy speech.
Anyway, he returned to his table and I went out leaving my neighbor in front of the empty bottle by the empty glass on the empty polish of the table. 

He resorted to the ultimate insult, yet the magic did not work and the bottle did not turn into a heap of pieces.
But still, I cannot forgive Gorbachev.
You ask what does Gorbachev have to do with fucking my asshole?
Even in the era of severe deficit and shortages, the bottled beer did not disappear in Konotop. 
Never.

But he did not stop and kept amending the Prohibition with new articles called to toughen the struggle with alcoholism...

In the evening of the day when the next wave of the toughest measures came into force, I, as usual, went to the Central Park dance floor.
However, I did not reach it, and I did not even reach the ticket office.
In the central alley of the park, I was intercepted by a muscular stranger with a dark hair and horseshoe-shaped mustache in the style of The Pesnyary. 

He told that I did not know him, but he knew me because of he was from KhAZ where he worked with my brother.
 
I recollected as my brother Sasha once enthusiastically talked about some former border guard demonstrating wonders of acrobatics at their workplace.
Probably, that was him.

The stranger carefully held a white plastic bag in his right hand and he did not slap the nasty night mosquitoes but instead blew them off from his biceps with sharp exhalations of air. 
Just like me, an adept of non-resistance, or so he was trained for frontier patrols to avoid producing unnecessary sound waves betraying your location. 

Giving a slight shake to the white bag—to which it responded with muted clandestine tinkle—he informed it was wine in there because he wisely procured it before the curfew. 
Would I keep him company?
The answer was in the affirmative.

It seemed strange to me though when he began to address the trickles of youngsters flocking to the dance floor with the same question – if they had a knife to open a bottle.
Everyone shook their heads and some even recoiled scared with the incongruity of the question with the general spirit of the current times.
Perhaps, that was his personal form of protest against the Prohibition.

The knife was never found, but he somehow contrived to tear the plastic cork off by application of a beam in the bench by which we stood in the alley.
He handed the bottle to me.
I said it would be better if he starts it because of a certain flaw in my brake system. 
‘Never mind. I've got another in the bag,' insisted he. 
Well, I had warned anyway, ain’t it?
And I killed the 700ml without a trace.
‘Hmm, yes,' said the companion thoughtfully. ‘I did not get it properly.' 

He uncorked the second bottle, but he did not give it to me, just held in his hands, and when we sank down on the bench, he put it between us.
We began to probe each other on which of the philosophical themes to start a friendly conversation.
As a rule, after the second glass, you start to give out smart things, getting astonished yourself by their unexpected wisdom. 
In the end, of course, everything will converge into the eternal gash predicted by the crane truck driver, Ivan Kot, but why not to shine with the well-trained mind for a starter?

Alas, the envious bad stars forestalled any shining, or sparkling, or flashing...

Along the alley slowly and almost noiselessly rolled a van with inscription ‘militia’ on the door.
The car pulled up and two gentlemen in cockades jumped out of the cab.
My interlocutor, not waiting for further developments of the events, without delay threw himself over the bench and started down the side alley towards the dark building of the city council.

I, who had just loaded one bottleful into the hold, could only admire how quickly he was leaving.
Moreover, those two cops were already standing over me.
None of them followed him, only the older one clattered his shoe heels against the asphalt remaining in the same spot.
His pretty fast step dancing he accompanied with a strange, possibly also Irish, song ‘oolyou-lyou!’.
The border guard accelerated sharply and disappeared into the darkness. 

The militiaman picked up the open but still not started bottle from the bench.
He turned it upside down in his outstretched hand and held so with a sadistic and sad air, as the wine gurgled out to the ground.

‘Come on,' the second man said to me, nodding at the already open side door of the van. 
I stuck my head inside.

In the dim light of a tiny bulb in the ceiling, those caught prior to me sat along the blind side walls. 
An elderly militia petty officer sat leaning his back against the partition from the cab facing the public.
Admiring the impeccable clearness of my movements, I ascended the interior.
The door slammed shut behind me.

‘Good evening!' amiably and indiscriminately greeted I all the present and at once got a kick in my ass. 
‘The bitch even ‘good-evening’ knows!’ yelled the petty officer who hit me.
Falling on someone from the previous catch, I automatically exclaimed:
‘I beg your pardon!’
And I looked back fearful of another kick.
But I saw that I was not going to get it for the ‘pardon’, the officer was too lazy to get up.

They drove us not too far.
It was the same courtyard where they once recorded the testimony of The Orpheuses on the disappearance of the German accordion, but now I was taken to another building. 

At the desk in the corridor there sat a Captain of the militia.
After a couple of questions to my fellow travelers, he sent them to the cell.
Then he turned to me.

Seeing that I answered his questions adequately and did not try to push for my rights or refute the report of the officers who delivered me, he asked me where I work.
Then he called somewhere to check and finally ordered me to go home.
‘Straight home! Got it? Nowhere else!’

I went out of the gate.
Why do they all tell me what to do?
Fuck them!
And I obstinately returned to the park and bought a ticket to the dance floor.

One of the public order enforcers at the gate doubtfully looked into my face:
‘Did you drink today?’
‘Never,’ said I and proceeded to my bench under the fence to sit until the end of dancing.
Which happened after a couple of numbers...

The notification of my detention reached the SMP-615 a month or two later.
I already forgot about it when the new boss called me from the construction site and demanded to write an explanatory.
He obviously decided to use the situation to full advantage and in a week appointed a meeting of the trade union committee to consider my personal case.

The autumn cold began and to the meeting, I came in my raincoat and hat. 

The boss, in his jacket and tie, began to expound my sinful deeds.
The freshest of them, attested by the paper from the militia, as I was violating directives of the party and government on the park bench. 
That’s how I disgrace the SMP-615 before the public and authorities!
How long to tolerate?

However, I chose the position of an observer and to all rhetorical questions answered with a shrug of my left shoulder under the raincoat.

And my mocking attitude to the management?
Look here – an explanatory written in verse!
 From the stack of papers on the desk in front of him, the boss picked one up and shook it in the air.

Wow! I did not know such a dossier had accumulated on me…

Another sample!
The reminder I wrote to the trade union committee:
‘Three months ago I applied for upgrading my bricklayer category.
However, till now the qualification commission of the SMP-615 neither raise their eyebrow nor turn their horn.’

The trade union committee thundered with laughter, the boss, obedient to the herd reflex, also grunted not understanding what was funny.

And it’s just dangerous to be nearby me.
I was putting an arm under the slab! 

It is a fact.
On that day there were four of us: the overseer Karenin, the carpenter Ivan, the crane operator Vitalya and I.
The sun was shining upon the March snow of the construction site when we were starting a new apartment building.

The foundation blocks were laid in the pit since autumn and then throughout the winter, Ivan was coming to the site to watch it from 8 to 5. 
He came, turned on the heater in the trailer and watched the white snowdrifts outside the window, or the portraits of the cute beauties from girlie magazines glued on all the walls...

On that March day, he became my hand. 
The task was simple – to lay four courses of bricks in the short wall of the future staircase entrance for mounting a stump of a slab over the future basement entrance.

Standing on the trestle between the foundation blocks, I raised two low corners and started laying courses under the shoorka to finish the stump supporting wall. 
It was a half an hour’s work while to the workday end there remained a little more than an hour.

However, Vitalya the crane operator was impatient to climb down from his perch in the cab of his tower crane and play cards with Ivan till five.
So Vitalya shouted from above to the carpenter to hook the concrete slab stump intended for the installation.
The stump’s one side would lay onto the blocks of the traverse wall, the other side would rest on the corners of the unfinished wall.
They’ll eat it!
The remaining gape between the corners would be filled sometime after, in the process of building.

I tried to explain to Ivan, that it was the most convenient moment for finishing the started wall.
Later, to fill the gap left under the stump the bricklayers would not have the trestle under their feet.
Let him better bring the mortar and I’d finish it in fifteen minutes working under such favorable conditions.

Vitalya for Ivan was closer than logic, he went and hooked the stump as said.
The crane operator raised the load up, turned the beam and rolled the tower along the rails carrying the stump to me for insertion as he had planned. 
He shouted from his cab to quickly spread mortar on the corners of the unfinished wall otherwise he would drop it just as it was on dry bricks – they’ll eat it!

Instead of mortar, I put my arm on a brick corner so that he did not fulfill his intention.
Vitalya fervently swore from his birdhouse in the height, rang the bell of the crane without interruption and keep closing in on the arm with the load.

In general, it was a frontal attack of two fighter planes against each other: he who yields’s a snotty chicken.
When the concrete stump neared the arm to about a meter, overseer Karenin awoke from watching the breath-taking battle of two aces and yelled to Vitalya take the load aside.
And there it hung while I finished the wall the way it was right. 

Overseer Karenin stood on the blocks above my head and asked:
‘Why did you do it, Sehrguey? He’s crazy enough to crush your arm. You’d be a cripple.’
‘Karenin, all my life is crushed. Everything that remained is my work. I don’t want they make a snot of it.’
‘Where?’ asked Ivan standing on the other wall of blocks behind my head. ‘What’s the talk about crushin’?’
‘He means it was his written fate from birth,’ overseer Karenin explained to him.

I was finishing the last course of bricks, like, busy, but I could not let the erudite conversation go without me:
‘May his hand wither, to that writer!’
Karenin and Ivan got silent at once.
The overseer somehow shrank and turned his eyes aside.

And it was that very moment, squinting my eyes in the rays of the sun descending to the horizon and spreading mortar for insertion of the slab stump onto the finished wall, that I thought for the first time that the events of our lives are defined and occur in the way that we ourselves will describe them in our later life. 
And it doesn’t matter to whom and whether in words or in writing…

(...it’s scary!
It turns out that with that curse of mine I wished my own hand to wither away?!..)

Ivan and I inserted the stump.
Vitalya got down from the tower crane and still had time for playing cards with Ivan before we went to the road to meet and get on our Seagull.
I soon forgot the whole incident, however, the boss did not omit to add it to the dossier. 

‘And you know as well as I do, how often they take him to the psychiatric hospital.
Besides, he is a chronic violator of labor discipline. 
Three occurrences of absenteeism in only one year!
That’s why my proposal is to dismiss him for systematic absenteeism.’

That’s right – two days to Moscow after the modal train for Andrew, and one day to the publishing house ‘Dnipro’ in Kiev.

At the time of each of my violations, I was realizing it was an act of absenteeism. 
However, it was normal for a worker at the SMP-615 to have a week of absenteeism, and a couple of champions had up to twenty days.
I considered the fact as a guarantee of permissibility to skip three days, the grosser violators would serve a cover for my ass.
No go!
The labor discipline can’t be bribed with a smartie’s calculations!

And now, after five consequential records in my workbook with gratitude and appreciation of my labor achievements, on October 18, 1985, the head of personnel department of the SMP-615, A. Petukhov, with that same handwriting wrote that I had been dismissed on the strength of Article 40, for absenteeism without satisfactory excuse. 

The participants in the meeting of the trade union committee unanimously voted for the measure proposed by the boss.
Afterwards, some of them commented such a result was exclusively my fault, I should have stood up, and, with the hat in my hand, humbly asked for mercy and they would forgive me. 

Why did I keep to the role of an observer to the end and did not make a speech in self-defense pointing out the absenteeism of others not few, and did not express my bitter regret for my wrong-doings?
I had got fed up.
The time had come to look for new points of application for my experimentalism.
Not because of so was my plan, though.
I, as always, remained just a tool, an operation-end man executing his orders.
The time and experimentalism were the decision-making bodies...

Besides, in summer a new 100-apartment block was finished. 
A bricklayer from our team, named Nina, a fat woman with a hairy birthmark on her cheek, got an apartment in it.
She entered the SMP-615 a couple of months before the commissioning of the apartment block and, having received an apartment, quit the organization.

I went to the personnel department and asked Petukhov about my progress in the line for getting an apartment.
He answered I was number 35 in it.
That’s ridiculous!
Six years before, I was 24th in the line!

He replied with calligraphic roundness since those times three bosses replaced each other and he himself had not yet been around and now my place in the list was thirty-fifth and he had no other data to refer to...

Fare thee well, my beloved construction train! 
Farewell, our team!
I won't set on fire our trailer, even though my guitar, brought on the Grinya's birthday, disappeared from it... 

When the last entry in the workbook says ‘on strength of Article’ you are sort of blacklisted – nowhere they have a job for you.

However, in Konotop there was an enterprise not too much afraid of blacklisted people, ‘Rags’ was the name of the brave company, aka recycling factory.
Taking into account my basic specialty, they gave me the job of a worker at the overhauling section. 

The overhaul consisted of three workers, but we did not do any major repair, neither any repair at all, for that matter.
We sat in the room, idling the time and occasionally went into the yard of the factory with stacks of modern recycling equipment brought there a year, maybe two, before and protected from the weather vagaries with a giant cover of black roofing felt because the building for the equipment had not been built yet.
The factory itself huddled in a pair of barrack-like structures – the offspring from the era of the first five-year plans – and two tall arched hangars from corrugated aluminum and a number of various huts leaning against the wall around the factory grounds.

But at the very beginning of my overhaul career, I was not bored. 
I was sent on a business trip to the city of Kiev.

The then Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Ukraine, Comrade Scherbitsky, had planned to visit the Kiev recycling factory in order to share valuable instructions on the development of so an important branch of the national economy. 
As the result, the recycling factories from all over the Soviet Socialist Republic of Ukraine were sending their workers to Kiev to spit and polish the metropolitan recycling factory for the high-ranking visit. 
When I arrived to make my contribution, the metal structures in the shop floors of the factory had been painted for the fourth time and the factory yard covered with the third layer of asphalt.

They were farewell days of golden autumn, the sun smiled affectionately from the calm sky, but the sight of small fur trees in stone pots to decorate the courtyard called for the blues to set in.
The insufficient capacity of the pots would not allow for the trees to grow and they were destined to inevitably wither after the pompous visit.

Before leaving for the business trip, I went to the Konotop Department Store to buy a sports bag for the necessary things.
As it turned out there was a fit of the deficit for such bags and I had to buy a smaller, though practical one, however, if you look closely, it was, after all, a female goods item. 
Might have I really been a pervert?

To stay in Kiev I was billeted at a boarding house near the ‘Pipe', on the very bank of the Dnieper river. 
Before the war, there was a plan to cross the Dnieper at that place by a metro line. 
They even managed to build a stop from the reinforced concrete that looked indeed like a giant pipe with a diameter as tall as a two-story house.
Later, the circumstances and plans were changed and the ‘Pipe’ got covered with all sorts of ‘here were Osya and Kisa’ and the like historical stamps.

The boarding house was a long one-story wooden structure with pencil-box rooms, like in the hostels, only the windows were wider.
In the mornings I went out on the sandy bank of the mighty stream to do exercises among the willow bushes.

To look at the Dnieper from so a-near was not at all like watching it from a local train flying over along the bridge. 
The oceanic mass of the water rolling by simply bewildered.
And so for thousands of years without a stop…
Three, four, bend left, bend right…

In the room, besides me, lived a blond from Southern Ukraine with a graphical story how he was stabbed on the beach. 
The familiar bros from the same neighborhood.
Jabbed a knife in the stomach and he fell on his back.
And then the precinct approached.
The guys pretended to play cards, and they threw an open newspaper over the knife.
The militiaman started asking about something, and the blond lay and looked, and couldn’t say a word, and flies were lading and running upon the newspaper.
The guys, naturally:
‘No, we know nothing.’
When the precinct left they called an ambulance because of he had not knocked on them... 

There was almost no renovation work left to be done at the factory and the business trippers were sitting in the Red Corner room where the young and bearded artist, from the local, wrote out the letters of the same slogan, day after day, on the same long strip of red fabric spread along a very long table, or gossiping with his friends, also Kievers, who knew ways to get in to him through the Checkpoint at the gate.

We changed clothes right there, in the spetzovkas given out by the factory, and hung ours onto the chairs.
The shower was working round the clock behind the turn of the corridor – some halcyon days in full swing.

My fellow business trippers were amazed by my ability to so insistently sit at the same place without strolling around the Red Corner or telling anything, and only look and listen...

After another of working days, I returned to the boarding house and got it that the blond went home because in the room remained only my bed, and my perverted bag was wide open and my last ten rubles were missing from it. 
And there still remained one week before the end of my business trip.

The next morning, it was Saturday, I went out in search of food.
I did not make any definite plan, but simply walked towards the distant bridge across the Dnieper. 
Then I walked along that almost traffic-less bridge supported with a multitude of steel cables from pylons.

Behind the bridge in the field to the right rose several tall apartment blocks – the embryo of the Troyeschina area, but I passed by and on, towards the faraway forest.
The road went through the village of Pohrebby and entered the forest.
There I started looking for mushrooms.

I came across only two species and both were unfamiliar.
Their gills looked alike, but those with pointed caps turned out to be very bitter, so I had to eat the other, concave ones. 
The hunger slackened and I went back.

In the field between the village and the distant high-rise building, I hit the mother lode. 
There was a scattering of potatoes on the roadside.
Probably, the truck was loaded with potatoes piling above the sides and during the transportation, the surplus poured over when the truck dodged an oncoming vehicle. 
I stuffed my pockets with potatoes and on Sunday came to the same place with the obviously female bag.

In the boarding house, at the very end of the corridor, was a kitchen with gas stove and a large common pan.
I boiled unpeeled potatoes for a few days.

And when I was coming back to Kiev over the bridge with the steel cables, I got it what prevented me from living a normal life, it was because of my poetry.
Everyone else was living like all the other people because they do not write poetry.
If I gave it up, then maybe everything would be all right...

It’s easy to say ‘it’s time to give up’, but how?
To burn the pocket notebook which the blond generously left in my bag?
Overly trivial.
And I decided to make a collection of poems and put an end to all that.
Such was the plan.

On Monday, I visited the waiting room of the head of the personnel department and asked his secretary-typist for 32 blank sheets of paper.
Exactly the volume of ‘Manifesto of the Communist Party’ by Karl Marx, but just as many pages were needed for all the poems plus the preface.
Apart from that, she gave me two uncut sheets, she couldn’t use them because of that defect.
Yet, the double sheet served a perfect folder for the rest.
In the Red Corner room, I asked the artist to make from that folder a cover for a collection of poems titled ‘Just so?’

In the evening at the boarding house, I copied the preface and the poems to the sheets of paper with almost typeset handwriting.

The following morning at the factory, the artist showed the cover he created – the author name and the collection title against the background of abstract-style beige waves.
Then he scratched the back of his head and confessed, that he had started the creation being tired and emotional and, as a result, the author together with the title was on the back, and not on the front cover. 
Defective double sheets were a rarity and I had no other choice but to paginate the collection in Arabic style – from the back cover to the front...

It’s very convenient to live in the same city with a publishing house, finishing work at five, you have plenty of time to visit them without any absenteeism.

In the office where the young man once sent me to the specialist on Maugham, there were already two – another young man and a young woman.
I asked where they were handing poetry in.
They were delighted and gave direction to the first office around the left corner in the corridor.

In the said office, on my report of delivering a collection of poetry I heard the familiar question:
‘Who sent you?’
‘Ah! Yes, sure! I was sent from the neighboring office, just around the corner. D’you know them?’
That served a sufficient recommendation for the collection to be transferred from hand to hand.

I left the publishing house both grieving and laughing.

Grieving?
I had rejected my offspring and I had pledged to keep sterile infertility from now on and forever.

Laughing?
I was free!

(...any poem started dooms you to bondage.
You strain yourself and plow like a slave until you can step aside and say ‘yes, like, it’s so-so, enough, I can’t do better...’ …)

Even louder I laugh at the poetry receiver because there was no return address on the collection only the fictitious name of the author ‘Klim Solokha’.
That’s it!
‘...service's done...’

‘What was their reaction?’ the artist asked.
‘A standing ovation.’

The existing supply of potatoes could see me until the end of the week, however just potatoes somehow did not satiate, even if sprinkled with salt.
The artist noticed when in the Red Corner I picked up a bread roll forgotten by someone and got dry on a windowsill and ate it hiding in my fist.
He told about it to the head of the personnel department. 
The head, with the mask of eternal disdain and dissatisfaction on his face, came to the Red Corner already empty of the business trippers of whom I was the last and asked what the matter. 

The money was lost from my bag.
Stolen? Who?
I knew nothing. There were ten rubles that were there no more.

He gave a displeased itch to his face and went out.
Soon they called me to his office and he said that he would stamp my business trip papers as completed (there remained still three more days) but I had to perform an urgent work: a KAMAZ truck dumped a heap of sand in a wrong place in the yard, the sand had to be moved but a bulldozer would hack the fresh asphalt with its caterpillars.

It took me two or three hours to shovel the sand to hide it behind the pots with doomed small fur trees.
I was paid ten rubles for the job, which I immediately received from the cashier in the accountancy. 
The local train ticket to Konotop was four rubles plus.

I went to a grocery store, bought a bottle of vodka, transparent as a tear of separation, something there for a snack, and returned to the Red Corner.
Together with the artist, we drank that vodka for the success of the collection of poetry which pages had to be turned backward... 

The overhaul at the Konotop recycle factory was headed by Yura, one of its three workers.
He loved to laugh and did it ably, exposing the fixture of white metal on his fang.
In the white-and-black films they usually portrayed Komsomol leaders looking like him, but only the fix did not fit into the image.

The second overhauler was Arsen, slightly cross-eyed but not too much so. 
He put on the airs of a dignified aqsaqal, despite his young age.
The reason for his pride in himself was that his son had already reached the age of two years.

I got on well with Arsen but Yura tried hard to crush me.
Most likely because of his intolerance to my high education.
I did not tell anyone about it, but those four years were recorded in my workbook kept in the personnel department and Yura spent a long time in the administration barracks and was everyone’s friend there.
The main impediment to establishing friendly relations between us two were my quotations and sharing news from ‘Morning Star’.
Arsen, for his part, tried to pacify our skirmishes.

Once in a conversation with Arsen I cited a quote from the work of Karl Marx ‘On the Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State’

(...Generally speaking, Frederick Engels is considered to be the author of that work, however, Fritz printed it after Karl had already passed away giving his bosom friend the opportunity to rummage through his archives and unpublished works in progress.
Probably, Engels, like the blond from Southern Ukraine considered himself entitled to expropriate belongings of the absent.
After all, he had supported Karl and his wife all their lives with the money of his father, also Fritz…)

I did not expose all those details to Arsen, just recited a couple of lines from the work itself.
Yura was around and he suddenly snapped in with the demand that I would never dare start provocative talks like this in his presence because he was a communist and knew where to give a phone call on statements of that kind.
For the first time in our clashes, the last word remained his. 
He dumbfounded me with his threat to halloo the KGB at the founders of Marxism-Leninism.
And that's no fun for they would gladly run them down, for all I know...

Another time, I was depicting to Arsen the Wagner's ballet about Scottish witches which I attended during the business trip to Kiev. 
Dancing a solo dance, one of the witches stumbled and with a wooden knock fell flat onto the stage floor.
‘Ha-ha-ha!’ cheerfully reacted Yura who again happened in the overhaul room.
‘And imagine, Arsen, in the whole hall there was not a single jerk to laugh at her.
She got up and danced on, showed her mettle, in short.’

And Yura too showed that it was not in vain that he kept visiting the administration.
I was transferred to the production section, to the post of a presser. 

What, actually, were Rags?

It's a place where railway cars were bringing scrap sorted at rubbish dumps. 
Worn and discarded clothing for the most part, as well as waste paper.

Women from the nearby village of Popovka dissected the tatters with the howling disks of their machines and again sorted rugs into soft mounds on the floor of the passage – knitted rags, artificial fur collars from winter coats etc. 
The whole day they stood in front of their machines in dusty coats with dangling clusters of safety pins on the chest which they detected and pulled out from fabrics so that they do not damage the disc.
Such grapes of pins made them evil-eye-proof indeed.

Two loaders approached the rags mounds with a deep box on long poles, like a sedan chair.
Their faces were wrapped in bandannas in bank robbers style not to inhale the dust from the dense clouds of it near the machines. 
They piled rags into their box and carried to the neighboring pressing section going in precipitated half-trot.
That jogging gait was dictated by the weight of the load.

(...once or twice I replaced someone of the missing loaders but was not able to do more than a couple of goes.
‘Sehryoga! You must be relaxed when carrying. Relax!’
Yet even with those instructions I could not reach relaxation with long pole-handles slipping out of the clenched hands…)

The press was also a box but it had a door and no poles because it stood on the floor in one place.
With the door open, first of all, you needed to put on the box bottom two thin and narrow metal strips, aka shinka, and take their ends out of the box. 
Then you drape the box inside with a piece of sackcloth and lock the door with a hook outside.
You fill the box with the trash brought by the loaders until it’s full and hit one the three buttons on the press side.
The electric motor on the press frame starts to crawl with cracking and howling down the shaft, pushing the press shield, on which it is fixed, also down.
The shield presses the trash to the bottom as deep as it can.
When the motor howling tone changes to whining it means the motor had done all it could and has no power to squeeze any further.
At that point, you hit the ‘stop' button and then the button ‘up'. 
The shield with the motor starts the return crawling up the shaft.
Its ups and downs the press executes really slowly.

Now you fill the space in the box produced by the shield’s travel with additional rags because the ready bale weight should be about 60 kg.
After the shield’s third going down stop it and tie tightly the ends of shinka getting a roughly cubic bale.
Send the shield up and roll the finished bale out of the box.
Roll it away along the floor so that it will not in the way of the following bales.

When there accumulates a flock of bales, Misha the loader comes with a two-wheel barrow. 
He drives the bottom shelf of the vertically held barrow under the bale and pulls the handles to himself.
The bale lays upon the handles supported with the shelf from behind.
Misha drags the barrow towards the exit from the pressing section.

Near the exit gate there stands the booth of Valya the weigher with a large luggage scales next to it.
Misha passes the bale onto the scales and, having dipped a short stick into a tin can with paint, writes on the sackcloth wrapping of the bale its weight figures which Valya shouted him through the glass of her booth because Misha is old and half deaf.

Then he drops the bale from the scales, again tilts it onto the wheelbarrow and drags it out of the pressing section into the open air, and there along the path of crippled concrete into the hangar for the finished product.

When an empty railway freight car was stopped by the hangar, the bales were stacked into it and taken away, no matter where, probably, to some factories for further processing of recyclables.

In the pressing section, there was only one window crusted with the dust accumulated there from the period of the First Five-Year Plan. 
The illumination was served by yellowish dim bulbs, one over each of the four presses.
True, one of them did not work, but for two presser workers, the remaining three were enough. 

The production norm for a presser was thirty-two bales per shift. 
I hardly fit into working time, and the other presser, Misha who lived with Valya the bale weigher, would have finished the norm ahead of time and left, whistling haphazard airs. 
He was more experienced presser and did not put excessive quantities of rags into the press box, while my bales were with overload.

Loader Misha would shake his deaf head disapprovingly writing with the dipped stick ‘78’ or ‘83’ on the bales of my production.
Then he with a groan took the bale on the barrow and dragged it out because he was a strong old man.
He was silent by nature and did not reprove me.
I felt guilty but all the same, could not catch the hang of guessing the weight of the rags in the press box... 

Apart from the midday break, there were two more half an hour breaks, just to rest.
We spent them in the common large room with lockers along two of its walls.
In the wall opposite the door, there were two windows also covered with dust but not so ancient, and large enough to make the room light. 
Four square tables with white plastic covered tops were put in a row along the room's middle line forming one common table for the midday meal. 
Long plank benches stood by its sides.
That was the locker room of pressers and jacks who changed their clothes there.
However, in the midday break, the Popovka women came there also because in theirs there was not a table to have a meal at. 

I did not have havvage there.
For the midday meal, I traveled to the canteen of the ‘Motordetail' plant. 
I crossed the railway track and went over the field, then I turned into the forest belt and followed the trail there to the tram 1 terminal opposite the plant check entrance.
The whole journey took fifteen minutes.

It was a very modern plant and through the glass walls of the canteen on the second floor opened the view on the field from where I came.
There were no problems at the check entrance, anyone in a spetzovka was considered a worker of the plant.

The havvage portions at the canteen were small but cheap and then for a couple of hours you did not feel any hunger. 
Sometimes the bale weigher Valya ordered to bring her a cake from the canteen.

On the way back, crossing the railway track in front of freight trains locomotives that were waiting for ‘green’ to enter Konotop station, I tried to bribe the locomotives with the cake wrapped in a piece of paper.
They had such good-natured faces with a red beard, like on the sail of the Kon-Tiki raft.
But they remained incorruptible.
“Well, as you please, then!’ and I was carrying the cake on to the bale weigher Valya...

And in half-hour breaks, we were playing ‘goat' with dominoes and talking. 
Besides the mujiks, there also rested the bale weigher Valya and a couple of younger women from Popovka, and sometimes the technologist Valya came as well.
She was a big woman, a poet's dream, but I had already given up those things. 

There were four jacks in the locker room but the old Misha kept silent all the time and never chip in.
And even ‘goat’ he played very rarely.

The jack Volodya Kaverin with a narrow reddish mustache running down to his chin, was, on the contrary, loud and passionate, but the jack Sasha with a dark toothbrush mustache restrained his partner’s impulses.
He was tall, calm, reliable and—what a small place the world is!—the husband of that very Valya from the typist pool who had typed the collection of short stories by Maugham in Ukrainian.
The fourth jack, Vanya, was chubby and shaved his round face.

He sometimes threatened to smash my fucking mug for some of my words, but I doubted it – you could see from his face that he was a kind man. 
Besides, he was a woman-hater and, holding the dominoes bones in his palm used to declare all of them to be bitches.
‘I’m on top of her, pumping, plowing, doing my level best and she just lays with her eyes into the ceiling “oy, Vanya! there’s so much cobweb in the corner!”, well, ain’t they bitches after that?!’

Even a saint wouldn’t hold himself back from adding a word:
‘Poor boy!’ says I, ‘such a humiliation leaves no choice but become gay indeed.’
And he again began fiddling his score of breaking my fucking mug.
However, chances to see his threat fulfilled were slim.
Knitted brows in Vanya's round face couldn't hide away his heart of gold...

At the end of winter, the factory workers traditionally went on a three-day excursion to Moscow. 
Not all, of course, only those who wanted to.
The technologist Valya asked me if I wanted.
I had to admit that I hardly had enough money to live until the payday. 
‘Don’t talk nonsense,’she said, ‘ the trade union pays for food and accommodation. You can go there with just three rubles.’
That was a challenge to the experimentalist.
I signed up for the tour and prepared the three rubles bill...

We arrived in Moscow in the evening.

The small column of the tourists was headed by Yura and led through the immense railway station to the square, it was not his first year in those tours.
I was the file closer keeping my hands in the empty pockets of the demi-season camel coat.
A bus was already waiting for us on the square to take to the Red Square.

The bus stopped and all the tourists went out to pass by the mummy of Lenin in the Mausoleum.
There only remained the bus driver, the guide Olya and I.
‘Are not you going?’ asked Olya.
‘I don’t like the dead.’
The driver slightly turned from the steering wheel to look back.

Obviously, to the Red Square arrived more buses with the excursionists from different other places of our vast Homeland because the driver opened the door and three more guide girls climbed up inside.
They knew each other and in brisk shoptalk were discussing the internal affairs of their tour operating organization and anything else. 

On fulfilling their sacred duty, the recycle factory employees returned from the frost-bound Red Square rubbing and slapping the shoulders of their coats and jackets.
We were taken to the VeDeNeKhA area, to a hotel built in the late fifties for participants of the World Festival of Youth and Students. 
The guide Olya specified details of the further cooperation: on the morning of the third day the bus would take us to the railway station because we were more interested in combing through all kinds of stores than in ‘look-to-the-right, look-to-the-left’, wasn’t it so?
Everyone joined in the chorus chanting that yes it was so.

We had our havvage in a canteen located in a separate building.
One of the canteen employees recommended me not to leave my camel coat on the hanger at the end of the hall. 
‘But eating with the coat off is more convenient.’
‘Look, Vera!’ she shouted to another worker in the canteen kitchen. ‘There’s one more guest from Communism!’

Since I was not at all interested in shopping, I mostly walked around the area, had a ride on a trolley bus to its terminal and even found a newsstand with ‘Morning Star’ on sale.
In Konotop, because of the explosive situation in Poland, that newspaper was often missing even at the railway station news-stall.
Probably, the editors in England were covering Polish events incorrectly.

Three rubles was not a sum to live in a grand style, but I still watched a historical action movie starring Karachentsev.

(...ours, in general, can make fifteen minutes of a movie quite watchable but the rest may have been safely skipped…)

To the hotel ‘Polyarny’ I went by metro.
Since it was the daytime, the restaurant guests were some kind of excursionists, because they all were sitting one by another along the table assembled from smaller ones put in a row and ate their havvage with their fur coats and overcoats on.

I asked a man in a waiter uniform jacket to call the waiter Nikolay but he only shrugged his shoulders.
Then I demanded the head waiter.
A tall woman came out in the same uniform jacket.
‘A year ago I had dinner at your restaurant when paying I was one ruble short. I promised the waiter to make up later. His name was Nikolay, he had a clever round face. Pass it to him, please.' 
And I handed her a ruble.
She silently accepted.

And I found another place to pass the time for free – the Central Library after the name of V. I. Lenin.
They gave a ticket there without any money as long as you had your passport.
That’s a really grand place the Central Library after Lenin, yes.
A cross between a theater and a metro station.
In short, the temple of book-worshipers.
Even the doors as tall as a church gate and with the inscription on the door handle ‘pull’.
So I did.

And behind the door was the vestibule with a window in the blind wall where they gave a free ticket if you had the passport, and then another door to the hall also very spacey.
It turned out to be the cloakroom but with white columns and at the far end of the hall were the stairs of milky white marble.
And all around the hall the friendship of peoples of the planet in full swing – all kinds of Burmese and Senegalese, yet the Whites also could be seen.

Then I saw the cloakroom was somehow out of balance – on its left side the cloakroom attendants were a-trot between the hangers and the marble barrier with bundles of coats: hither-thither, back and forth and the line to them did not shorten; but those on the right stood idle. 

I felt sorry for the trotters, so I turned right and dumped my camel on the white marble barrier of the slackers.
They hardly paid any attention.
Then one of them in a lordly manner deigned to explain – their half was for academicians.

Some f-f.. frightful segregation with discrimination.
As if my camel would graze their fur coats!
In short, I thanked for the information and walked to the other side for mere mortals.

Before the stairs of milky white stretched up in the height, there was a narrow gate not seen from afar. 
They check your ticket at the gate and give more slips of paper and only then let go up between a pair of militiamen standing by for the respect to order.

Up there high above the cloakroom the endless ranks of catalogs in boxes that looked like automatic storage cells, only the color not metallic but wooden. 

I rummaged through the wired cards and found Freud, his lectures published in 1913 on the occasion of somewhat of his jubilees.
A conjuncture publication of just 60 pages.
I wrote out all the indices and other marks of that booklet and went to the reading room to get an hour of pleasure. 
Greetings!
The attendant looked into my application slip and shouted like people shout calling the militia to save them from muggers: Freud?!!
Exactly, says I, I wanna see what the guy was about, be so kind, please.

That’s when she rubbed my silly nose in.
To have access to the mentioned book, says she, I had to be a Ph.D. of relevant sciences and be a permanent resident of the Moscow city (the free ticket testified that I wasn't) and the last but not least, I had to produce a document asserting that the gods of scientific Olympus allowed me to open the book. 
My jubilation ceased with a fizzle and in a state of a dulled calm, I climbed down the pasteurized stairs to collect my camel and go...

I went out into the street caged in calm as thick as bullet-proof glass.
No desire to go anywhere, no wish to want anything.
On reaching the underpass to metro, I leaned my back against the parapet and once again eyed the pompous building of the Central Library after Lenin.
My mind was perfectly empty and somewhere in the background there floated the lines from Shevchenko:

‘… learn what is foreign, keep what is yours...’

Damn, folks!
Where am I?
The huge temple, the giant letters: Central Library Lenin.
What was his ultimate goal?
So that workers could read books!
His bequeath had been drummed into our heads, dinned in the ears, rammed down the throat:
‘Learn, learn, and learn!”

And what is the result?
Before the Great October Revolution, in 1913, any worker could look into a bookstore and buy those 60 pages of lectures, if so was his wish. 
After the mentioned revolution in the Central Library after Lenin they told me: ‘fuck yourself! there’s no book for you because you are a worker!’

So I stood there, rooted into the parapet, full of crystal-like stillness.
I was awakened with the scraping din from all sides. 
And I saw a dozen of workers shoveling the snow along the sidewalk.
The sun shone brightly and they scrubbed and looked at me as if they were waiting for something.
And what could I share?
I had just got the fuck myself.
Or maybe they wanted to scrub along the parapet too?
Well, I tore off my roots and joined the flow to the underpass, to hide deeper from the shining peaks… 

On the agreed morning the bus came and the senior recycler signed the papers brought by the guide that they drove us three days all around the capital, telling about its historical and architectural sites.
And everyone was satisfied.
The guide Olya, who enjoyed three days of paid leisure.
The shoppers loaded with the snapped deficits.
The driver with the three-day ration of gasoline which could be put into circulation.
And most of all – I, with a coin in my pocket worth fifteen kopecks.
The technologist Valya did not exaggerate – you can have Moscow for three days with just three rubles in your pocket...

The only drawback was that I owe the factory those three days, that is three daily norms of thirty-two bales each. 

The technologist Valya said not to worry and to produce two or three surplus bales every day until I made up.
I never liked to be in debt and on the third day after return from Moscow, I came to work with a snack wrapped in a newspaper, aka ‘brake’, to keep me during my period of Stakhanovite labor.

When the factory bus took everyone to the city and Popovka women went home on foot, I faced the creaky howling slow-go press and the mountain of rags that grew up around it during my Moscow recreation and almost did not decrease in the finished day-shift.
I worked the second shift, then the third, and even managed to sleep in the locker room for about twenty minutes before the start of the new working day.

In the summer, another presser was added to us and very timely, because the presser Misha went on vacation.
The newcomer had some kind of a long oriental name because he was a Tajik, but I could not pronounce it in any way.
I dropped my attempts at unfamiliar phonetics and started to call him simply Ahmed.

Ahmed was short and swarthy and never parted with his happy smile until he tried to enjoy a midday meal in the canteen of ‘Motordetail’ plant.
Then he lay on a bench in the locker room and the women from Popovka were regretfully shaking their heads above him and sharing all kinds of healthcare advises.
After the payday, he began to come to work with ‘brakes' wrapped in newspaper and his digestion got adjusted. 

On his first working day, it was I who passed to him the secrets of the presser profession. 
Finishing the explanations on the purposes of the three press buttons and after demonstrating how a skillful presser locks the box door with the hook outside it, I started to share my delight with a certain German poet who had declared that all seagulls, when in flight, look like the capital ‘E’.
And why?
The name of his beloved was Emma!
Is he not a fine fellow? Eh? Had noticed!

Seized with a lecturer’s fervor, in the dim light of a bulb, I scratched that same ‘E’ with a scrap piece of wire on the gray plaster of the nearby wall.

(...and now ask me: what for did I nag at a guiltless guy about the unnecessary facts regardless of his poor understanding of Russian?
The answer is: so is the human nature.
The desire to teach is chiseled in our genes. 
To visualize this trite truth look out of the window into the yard and watch the everyday picture: some mujik has raised the hood of the car and a whole swarm of advisers surrounds him at once to share, to flash with a personal crumb of knowledge. 
The desire is uncontrollable as in that barber who spied the ass ears of King Midas:
‘I know! Listen to me!’…)

At Rags among the wastes sometimes were found usable things.
So, in the locker of the jack Sasha there were stored about half a dozen sweaters with and without the raindeers across the chest. 
And he every day was sporting another sweater.

Volodya Kaverin did not care for small fish.
He collected fur cuffs and collars from discarded coats so that when he had enough he would order to sew him a fur jacket or maybe a fur coat.
He had collected three collars so far and twice a week he would take them out of his locker, shook in turn and ask you: 
‘It should work out a nishtyak jacket, right?’

Vanya, in his locker, was keeping a parade tunic of the lieutenant colonel of the Soviet Army with golden shoulder straps and everything.

When I was sent on the errand to buy vodka from the liquors store on the Semashko street, they at once equipped me with a kind of jeans I would once have only dreamed about.
And only that maple leaf embroidered on the right thigh was, in my opinion, some excessive addition to design.

The line to the store began long before it and it was incomprehensibly looped along the sidewalk for which fact the lines of that sort were named ‘Gorbachev loops’.
But it's not worth to call it so out loud because, as the rumors had it, the KGB sec-cols were present among the thirsty part of the population to pick fresh jokes and take note of effusively dissatisfied citizens. 

Because of those rumors, I demanded a camouflage outfit from the recycling colleagues and everyone agreed that, yes, it was necessary. 

Despite the disguise I still was identified by the pair of errand-boys from the SMP-615, however, they chose to keep aloft. 

(...to get into such line after the end of the working day and reach the store before it was closed was unthinkable.
That’s why the enterprises had developed an interlayer of errand-boys among the employees.
The workers covered their absence and did jobs ‘for that guy’…)

Along with its progress, the line was often shaken with panic rumors that vodka at the store was running out. 
Indeed, the movement stalled.
But to the store back a truck came and volunteers with enthusiasm dragged inside the wire boxes of 25 bottles each... 

I returned to the recycle factory with vodka at half-past four. 
Two jacks, in turn, had been pressing the bales to fulfill my daily norm. 
Because of inexperience, they produced the bales with underweight.
The bale weigher Valya was displeased and loudly yelled from her booth.
The deaf Misha kept joyful silence dragging his barrow with light bales to the hangar outside.
Gaining acceleration, we were entering reconstruction, aka perestroika...

And with all the deficit of terry towels, in the washing room where everyone washed the dust off their dirty hands before the meal, no less than a dozen of those towels, found among the rags, were hanging along the running water pipe over the tin trough with taps above it. 
My personal towel, however, I brought from 13 Decemberists and kept it in the locker room hung on the heating pipe in the corner under the window.
I was afraid that if left in the washing room it would be used by folks as any other piece of garbage hanging there.

How did such a deficit come to my hands?
At some of my visits to the village, Raisa Alexandrovna appreciating my labor achievements about their hutta decided to pay in kind.
She presented me with a towel and a brand new briefcase.
A very nice towel it was, white and fluffy, not for the whole body, though, just for face and hands judging by its size.
And it had a blue squirrel imprinted in profile with a bushy tail, also very pretty.

Yet one day, coming back from the midday voyage to the remote canteen at the ‘Motordetail’ plant, I noticed that someone’s dirty hand had horsed around the tender squirrel in the corner.
Naturally, I kicked up some dust – what the f-f.. frivolities with my personal belongings?!
I had not picked my towel from the rags in the dirty garbage but brought it from home!
Everyone pointed at Ahmed.

Once again, in details, I explained specifically to him where the towel had been brought from and urged him to understand and never again, under no circumstances use it.
There were flocks of them hanging in the washing room were they not enough for him?
He apologized and said he did not a-know…

I had to take the towel back to 13 Decemberists and wash it on Monday.
On Wednesday, freshly washed and ironed, the blue squirrel was hanging as a banner of cleanly way of life in the corner of the locker room.

On a half-hour break, I was playing ‘goat' with jacks, when the locker room door slammed after the belated Ahmed. 
Murmuring some Tajik folklore tune he passed the table with the shaky dominoes line.
Vanya jabbed me into the side and pointed with his chin into the corner, meaning ‘look at the prankster!’
Ahmed meticulously, like the surgeon before operating on Lucy Mancini, was wiping his wet hands on the bushy tail of my squirrel.
But, by the sidelong glance from under the squint of his olive eyelids, I figured it out that he knew it as well as I did that he was no fucking doctor. 

‘Ahmed,’ said I and general attentive silence reigned in the locker room. ‘I see you liked the creature. I gift it to you together with the towel.’
‘Oy, I forgotta!’
‘Presents are not to be discussed. Take it, it’s yours.’
And I slammed two doubles at both ends of the bones line on the table top.

(...he did pay me back for that German poet with his letter-like seagulls after all, or maybe he did not forgive me ‘Ahmed’…)

A couple of presses were located outside the pressing section.
When I got the task of pressing waste paper with one of them it was like going out of the dungeon because the press was installed next to a big window.
And under the window, there were the baggage scales on which jack Misha checked the weight of the waste paper bales and said it to me. 
Then he dragged them straight to the hangar because it was two times closer than from the pressing section. 
That's why the weigher Valya gave me a pencil and said to keep the record of the waste paper bales kilos and at the end of working day hand the list in to her so that she would copy it into her ledger. 

That pencil made of me an incurable graphomaniac.
At first, I used it to write the columns of figures in the unfinished but discarded copybook of the fourth-grade student Lyuba Dolya, picked up from the hillock of waste paper. 
But then, under creaks and groans of the slowly creeping press shield, it suddenly wrote ‘The Landscape’ a short verbal picture with a puzzling end, all by itself.

I read that page from a schoolgirl copybook and saw that it was perfect. 
I liked it – not a word to be added or taken away.

‘The Landscape’ was followed with ‘The Still Life’ on the background of the winter and ‘The Portrait’ of the summer period.
Together with ‘The Pastoral', they composed ‘The Vernissage' of four paintings. 

But all that came later, because ‘The Landscape’ was just the pencil’s test of the pen, after which it started to write the initial dialogue of the summer piece ‘Sehryoga drenches horses’.
Later there came the winter, spring, and autumn pieces included in the collection ‘The Year Seasons’ of a certain writer Bidlyuk.

Of course, not all of those works were finished with the same pencil but they sprung from it.
The pencil put a spell on me, made me a zombie so that I kept it in my fingers while it went on writing line after line in other scraps of paper because Lyuba Dolya's copybook was soon over. 

(...at times it's needed so little for the magic to happen. 
Just think of it – an offal stub of a pencil…)

When ‘The Year Seasons’ pieces were finished, I wanted to see them in a typewritten form but felt strongly against going to the typist pool again, I don’t even know why.

In the one-room public library on the first floor of an apartment block in the Zelenchuk area, I discovered a typewriter with Ukrainian letters.
There worked two librarians a woman of retirement age and a fat girl with glasses, like a granddaughter of the senior lady.
Se called her ‘granny’ anyway.

My attempt at borrowing the typewriter met a cold reception.
They did not know what I was going to type, and the KGB was storing samples of text written with their typewriter.
The senior lady shared also that by an unadvertised rule they had samples by typewriters from all the city organizations.
Everything was extremely simple and logical, were I to type some anti-Soviet proclamations the organs in charge would find out at once whom to catch by the gills.

(...it’s nice to realize that you are protected by so prudent organs…)

Then I asked for permission to type one story directly in their room at the desk behind the bookshelves.
I would leave the carbon copy by them.
The lady shook her head in doubt but the granddaughter persuaded her to allow.

Oh, my! What a hard job it was!
It took me two days off to tap through one page and a half.
Poor librarians!
It should have fretted away their brains – my knocking out one letter after another with the clumsy index finger.

The end product was full of typos but the librarian girl liked it although she had never in her life heard the colloquialism ‘to drench horses’ and had to ask from her friends.

And I had to restore my relations with Zhomnir because once upon a time he proudly showed me a portable typewriter stored in his archive chamber.
He could not lend it me but, as a representative of the intellectual elite, was obliged to allow me solving my creative problems in his archive chamber.
And Maria Antonovna had been loving me all along.
That’s why I started visiting Nezhin again on weekends.

Zhomnir demonstrated the way of using all the fingers for typing with the typewriter.
Maria Antonovna was making a bed for me on the sofa in the living room.
I typed all night long and in the morning walked to the railway station for a cup of coffee.

At the daytime, I typed sitting on the tiny balcony. 
From the height of the fifth floor, I had a fine view of the green trees below and the red brick chimney of the stoker-house among them. 
I watched the pigeon flock tumbling in the sky and tucked another sheet of paper into the typewriter.
I like that way of life although at times I remembered that it was Nezhin and then the nostalgia welled up.
Rather, I did not forget where I was, not even for a single moment and the nostalgia retreated only before the clatter of the typewriter...

The final of the winter piece in 'The Year Seasons’ outraged Zhomnir.
‘Look! It’s ridiculous! How could a man be such a fool!’
And I rejoiced because he did not find faults with the language in my story but was indignant and argued with the character of the narrative!

As a payment for farming out his typewriter Zhomnir, for old time's sake, was passing English poems to me for translation. 
Kipling, Shelly, Frost. 
I was translating and bringing them back on weekends, but that does not count I still kept writing poems of my own kicked off... 

By the Soviet labor legislation, every worker in the USSR enjoyed an annual vacation.
In autumn I got it after slaving for eleven months at the recycling factory. 
I did not make plans where to spend my vacation.
I knew where exactly I was going.


